**David Barsamian** This is Alternative Radio. I'm David Barsamian. This edition of AR features Robert Parry on the art of investigative journalism. Getting to the roots of a story is often a long and complicated process. While newsrooms shrink and budgets are cut, fewer and fewer editors are willing to assign reporters to digging out recondite facts.

**David Barsamian** Robert Parry is a premier investigative journalist, who has broken a number of important stories. He's the author of Fooling America and Trick or Treason. He's worked on PBS' Frontline series. Robert Parry is the editor of the Consortium, a new independent bi-weekly newsletter. I talked with Robert Parry at the Media and Democracy Congress and San Francisco. I asked him about his background in journalism.

**Robert Parry** My dad was in journalism. He ran a paper in Massachusetts, so it came through the family and I worked that for a while when I was going through college. Every summer I had to work in the back shop or do circulation, or do some grungy job in journalism. It was good though, I was able then to develop a certain interest in different parts of the business, but I wanted to do reporting. I worked for a while at this paper in Framingham, Massachusetts and then went to the AP in 1974. Was in Baltimore and Providence, Rhode Island and then went to Washington in 1977 to join the AP National staff.

**Robert Parry** Worked on the desk, as you have to do at AP for a year or so, then went to Capitol Hill and covered economic issues and did some investigations. Then in 1980, at the end of 1980, I was appointed to the AP Special Assignment Team, which is their investigative unit and that's where I started doing work on some the Reagan scandals.

**Robert Parry** To me it was interesting, especially also after the Vietnam war period and the things we learned in the '60s and the '70s, were whether or not there were abuses of power that affected our democracy. Was lying becoming an instrumental part of the way government worked? Were there abuses in the National Security apparatus that we had seen in the '60s and '70s? Were they continuing on into the '80s. Those kind of questions I thought were of interest and I think that's what led me to some of the stories I did. Plus, in Central America, you had an awful series of events. There was mass murder going on, which the United States was funding. We were training some of the people who were carrying out these atrocities.

**Robert Parry** Then I think most cynical of all, the United States government was covering up what had happened. When you'd find out, as some people did who were courageously reporting in Central America at the time about these death squad operations, that would come back to Washington and the government would lie about it and say nothing happened, they'd investigate it and it was all cleared up. Much of the mainstream press at that point was, because it was under some pressure too, but was not being critical enough of how the government was functioning in that area.

**David Barsamian** One such journalist was Raymond Bonner of the New York Times who reported on the El Mozote massacre in El Salvador. What happened to Bonner?

**Robert Parry** Well, the El Mozote case is an important one because, not that it was entirely isolated. In El Salvador, there were hundreds and thousands of people being murdered each week and month and the United States Government was aware of all that, but under President Reagan, for geopolitical concerns and so forth, those actions were being covered up. In effect, what we saw happening in Central America was kind of a Phoenix Program. The Phoenix Program being what happened in Vietnam where the CIA organized special teams to go out and kill the Cadre, the Viet Cong Cadre and in the view of the CIA, it was very successful in that they did wipe out much of the Viet Cong Cadre. Now the north Vietnamese sent in troops to replace some of those people, so the U.S. side still lost the war, but the agency people thought it was very successful, so they in a sense replicated that for Central America.

**Robert Parry** There were teams of people who were trained and supported who were going out and doing massacres throughout Central America, particularly El Salvador and Guatemala. Right around Christmas time in 1981, the first U.S. fully trained battalion, the Atlacatl Battalion of the Salvadorian army swept through northeast El Salvador and they came upon a town called El Mozote, where ironically the people were not supporting the guerrillas, so they weren't afraid of the military as some of the guerrilla strongholds where people fled. It didn't matter. The goal was to wipe out everybody, so the army surrounded the town, they took everybody captive. They took out the men, the fathers first and executed them. Then they took out the mothers, the women and they executed them in front of the kids. Then they took out the children. Some of the girls were raped and then the children were slaughtered too. Everybody was killed, the whole town, except for a couple of people who had escaped or watched it from the fringes.

**Robert Parry** This was when Raymond Bonner and Alma Guillermoprieto of the Washington Post, Bonner was with the New York Times, went to the area, very heroically. This was not without great danger and it was when journalists were still trying to do honest work, which we've sort of stopped doing it seems like now, but then there was still that commitment and Bonner went out and came back with a story, as did Alma. It appeared in early 1982 in the front page of the New York Times that there'd been this horrible massacre. The response of the United States government, the Reagan Administration, was to send officials to the Hill, Tom Enders particularly and Elliott Abrams, and testify to congress that nothing had happened. That there was still lots of people living in El Mozote. We kinda laughed and it was kind of funny. They said they'd investigate it.

**Robert Parry** Of course, the Democrats kind of accepted it as Democrats are want to do these days and then the right-wing media attack groups, their Accuracy in Media types came in and attacked Bonner as spreading communist disinformation and so forth. It was part of this effort to stigmatize, controversialize and destroy Bonner's reputation and career and it was very successful. The New York Times pulled him out of El Salvador. He was stuck on some minor assignment and eventually was pushed out of the newspaper altogether.

**Robert Parry** That action, which was, I was talking to some people from the U.S. Embassy in El Salvador at the time, and they were gloating about their great success in having gotten rid of this reporter who was causing them trouble. What happened also, was that this was being replicated against other journalists who were telling the truth about Central America and those of us up in Washington. I was based in D.C., who were trying to tell the truth there. The same sort of approach was taken. These media attack dogs would come at you, smear you, write letters, controversialize you, call your work, agenda driven, biased et cetera, et cetera. Telling the truth became increasingly dangerous both in Central America for reporters who wanted to maintain a livelihood and a career, and for those of us in D.C. who were trying to tell the truth there too.

**David Barsamian** About this time, during the early Reagan years, National Public Radio also came under attack from the Administration.

**Robert Parry** Right, there was a group, which actually was very important, but we spent very little attention on, which was called the Public Diplomacy Apparatus. We now know a lot about this from the documents that came out of Iran Contra and what happened with the Public Diplomacy Apparatus was that around 1982, about the same time of the Bonner matter, Bill Casey, who was Director of Central Intelligence, was very concerned that too much of the information about Central America was getting out straight to the American people and they wanted to so something, which they called perception management. That was the phrase they used.

**Robert Parry** Casey had sent over to the National Security Council, his top propagandist, a man named Walter Raymond Junior, whose career had been with the CIA. Raymond leaves the CIA sort of technically, but then becomes head of this operation called Public Diplomacy. They set up an office at the State Department. Otto Reich is the Director of this Department and this Department's job is to manage the perceptions of the American people in Central America and a few other issues that the CIA is interested in. Casey monitored and oversaw this program while CIA Director, which is supposedly against the law, but their explanation of that was, well Casey was not wearing his CIA hat when he did that, he was wearing his Advisor to the President hat, which is what they testified to that when he finally came out in public.

**Robert Parry** What happened with this Public Diplomacy operation was they would go around and pressure editors, bureau chiefs, to change what their reporters were saying from the field. In the case of National Public Radio, Reich arranged for meetings there to put pressure on the reports that were coming out. They were fairly honest reports and fairly good reports about Contra atrocities. This was when the Nicaraguan Contras were involved in serious death squad actions too. NPR had done a particularly offensive story to the Administration about a village, which had seen many of the men slaughtered in a Contra atrocity. The story had been about the funeral of these men, so Otto Reich goes over to NPR and is allowed to sit down and harangue the producers and reporters involved. The foreign editor, a man named Paul Allan was later pushed out of NPR, and one of the reasons cited was this report. Across the board, reporters were seeing if they told the truth about these areas that the Administration wanted not told about, they were putting their livelihoods and their careers on the line. Fewer and fewer people were willing to do that.

**David Barsamian** Talk more about the structural relationship in D.C. between the Press Corp and the Administration.

**Robert Parry** Well, there's this false image that many people in Washington like to pretend that there's this very adversarial press and it sort of watchdogs the people in power. It comes out of the Watergate period, where reporters liked to fashion themselves, or fancy themselves as Woodward and Bernstein. The reality has grown very different. Whether it was ever that way is a question, but certainly by the mid-80s, the relationship between those reporters still standing and the Reagan administration got cozier and cozier. There are many people in the Reagan Administration who are very press savvy, very PR savvy. They came out of advertising and there is slip operatives like Jim Baker, who was especially good at massaging the egos of editors and bureau chiefs.

**Robert Parry** You'd have this kind of cozy, friendly, let's have dinner together relationship between the top brass of these elite organizations and these kinds of officials. More and more, you saw, even the papers that are wrongly characterized as liberal, the Washington Post for instance, get very much in bed with the Reagan and Bush Administrations, which had further effects on journalists, because you felt if you ever actually pushed a story that Ronald Reagan or George Bush or Jim Baker didn't like, the next thing you'd see if your bureau chief would be sitting down at the Hay Adams Restaurant with Jim Baker and they were tete-a-teting and you know what comes out of those kinds of things is, "Oh this guy's a problem. He's off on a tangent. He's got an agenda." Those kinds of things really have an affect.

**Robert Parry** There was also a technique that was used, especially on the women who were in Central America. That was that the Public Diplomacy guys would go around to editors and say, "We heard that your reporter correspondent in Honduras, or Guatemala, or El Salvador, was sleeping with a communist, sleeping with a KGB agent, sleeping with a Sandinista. That kind of character assassination proved very effective, because first of all, in most cases, the reporter won't even know it happened maybe until years later. Secondly, there's no way to disprove it. You can't prove you never did something over a long period of time like that, so no evidence would be presented against you, but these whispering campaigns would be mounted. Then they'd surface in the Washington Times, the Unification Church owned newspaper. It would surface in Accuracy in Media, it would surface in all this very powerful right-wing media that was being built during this time.

**Robert Parry** The right-wing media now rivals in many ways the corporate media for influence in Washington. It's not as big and not as much money made, but it is very big and it's very powerful. If you're a reporter who is targeted by those groups, you don't stand a chance. You will be purged from your profession.

**David Barsamian** The Iran Contra scandal was an elaborate arms and money deal involving the United States, Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia and the Nicaraguan Contra rebels. How did you get the story?

**Robert Parry** Well as I said, in '81 I was on the Special Assignment Team at AP and I was left to pretty much say what I wanted to do. I thought, Bill Casey seemed like an interesting character and the CIA stuff was kind of interesting and the Central America stuff was hot, so I just sort of gravitated to what I thought would be an interesting story. Plus, I was picking up very quickly that they were lying about their Central America material. I remember, it was in December of 1980, before Reagan actually came into office when the four American church women were raped and murdered in El Salvador. I saw how Jeane Kirkpatrick and others misrepresented that, how the Administration, or the incoming Administration lied about it. It was clear it was gonna be a gloves off kind of approach toward people in Central America who weren't towing the line. I thought that would be an interesting story to follow, so I did.

**Robert Parry** That led me mostly through the Central America side of it, to discover Oliver North. I first met him in 1983, we had lunch together at the Hay Adams Restaurant and we had a rather polite chat. At that point, I realized this guy who was a rising star at the National Security Council at that time, was sort of out of control already. I kept an eye on him and I was also doing stories about the assassination manual that the CIA prepared for the Contras and I had done a number of stories about how CIA personnel had actually engaged in combat with the Sandinistas in secret. There were a lot of stories we were getting onto the wire at AP that were really important historical stories.

**Robert Parry** In early '85, I was given the Pope Award for some of the work. I was a finalist for the Pulitzer and we were one of the three finalists for national reporting and we didn't get it and Walter Mears who was then Executive Editor of AP took me out to lunch in New York and he said basically, "Let's go back at them. What's the story that'll wind the Pulitzer?" I said, "Well, Walter. There's this guy at the NSC named Oliver North. It seems to me from what I'm picking up, he's running this war." Congress had cut off the funding for the Contras at this point and I said, "This could win a Pulitzer." He said, "What do you need?" I recommended that Brian Barger, who was a freelancer to be brought onboard to help out on the story and that was done. We started pursuing this more aggressively.

**Robert Parry** I did the first story on North in June of '85 based on some White House sources and some sources in the Contra movement. It was pretty sketchy. North was involved in fund-raising and other activities beyond what they were saying he was doing. It was the first reference in any story to North. By October of '85, I had written that Ronald Reagan had approved these secret operations by North. In December of '85, we reported that the Contras were involved in drug trafficking. Brian Barger did much of the heavy reporting on that and then by the Spring of '86, we reported that there had been a Federal investigation that had been squelched into the Contra operations and then in June of '86, we had a piece with 24 sources describing the North operation. How he used front people, intermediaries, Rob Owen and so forth to handle some of these contacts. Much of the story's already on the record, or was out there. AP had run it on the wire.

**Robert Parry** It was that story that led in August of '86 for the House Intelligence Committee led by Lee Hamilton, to go over to the White House and they sat down with North and they said, "Colonel North, there are these allegations that you're secretly running this war and what about them?" He said, "Oh, they're not true." They said, "Well, thank you very much. We're sorry we bothered you." They came out and they called me and they said, "We investigated your story and it didn't check out. You were wrong." At this point with the Democrats now joining in this operation, Brian was on the overnight, which is not a nice thing to be on at AP, you worked all night. He was sort of pushed out of the company. I was in the dog house, I'd sort of gotten it wrong you know, but my record was such that they weren't gonna get rid of me, they just kind of, "You've sort of got us on a limb kid and you blew it."

**Robert Parry** That's where we stood. We'd been beaten. One of the things that's interesting about going back to Iran Contra, was that those early stories had been discredited and destroyed by a combination of the lying at the White House, the right-wing media attacks on all of us, the Washington Times, the Accuracy in Media types, the Brent Bozells, the Wall Street Journals, all these right-wing publications had attacked us and misrepresented the facts and had helped destroy us as effective journalists, but as luck will have it, history is not so easily contained. Even though we'd lost, even though congress was then persuaded to renew the Contra funding, they approved $100 million dollars for the CIA to go back into the business of trying to overthrow the Sandinista government, one of the last planes in Oliver North's operation, the last flights was being flown on October 5th, 1986. The plane left Ilopango airport in El Salvador and flew down the coast over Costa Rica and then back up into Nicaragua to drop weapons to the Contras.

**Robert Parry** On that Sunday morning, there was this teenage Sandinista draftee, a kid. He had a CN missile. It was a Russian made one, so who knows what would happen with it. He had never fired one before in his life. He remarked later, when he was sort of debriefed publicly, that he aimed it at the plane and fired it and was amazed that the missile went at the plane. It hit the plane and in the back of the plane, the cargo door was open and one of the guys, one of the Americans who had been former CIA named Eugene Hasenfus, was preparing to kick out some guns, so he had his parachute on and he was near the open door and as the plane spiraled to its death, he was able to push his way to the door and push his way away from the plane and parachute down and he was captured. From his statements, which he made publicly a couple days later, the truth about the North involvement with the Contras began to come out.

**Robert Parry** I flew down there at that time, I was at the Hasenfus news conference in Managua and he of course said things like that, "George Bush and his office were involved. The CIA was behind this." Then phone numbers that were found aboard his plane were traced eventually to North's office. By October of '86, no thanks to the Washington news media, no thanks to the Nation Press Corp really, except for a few of us who tried to do some stuff, this major historic event came out. If it hadn't been for the kid with the missile though, there's no reason to think it ever would have come out. That's how close our history was to having been falsified on a major issue.

**Robert Parry** What happened after that was sort of interesting, because then a month later, a Beirut newspaper. Not again an American newspaper, not one of the wealthy high-powered American journalism kind of outfit, but a little paper in Beirut runs a story about how the U.S. has been trading arms for hostages. Then we get into the investigation on the Iran side of the operation.

**David Barsamian** Now the arms for hostage component of this story. That wasn't something you had an inkling of?

**Robert Parry** Well, we had an inkling of it, I should say, but the AP was in a very tough spot here because Terry Anderson was an AP correspondent who had been kidnapped on the streets of Beirut and one of the terrible historical ironies here is that while we, Brian Barger and I were investigating Ollie North for his Contra operations, the AP management was meeting with him to see if he could help negotiate the release of Terry Anderson. That of course was a very high priority and rightly so for the AP, but it put them in a terrible conflict of interest where my bureau chief, who's editing the stories I was writing about Oliver North, is meeting with Oliver North and asking basically for him to help the AP get this guy out.

**Robert Parry** It was one of these just very difficult moments and I'm not sure it's easy to make a call here as to which way you go, but because of those contacts, which I began to hear about by the Spring of '86, as our stories were encountering more and more trouble internally at AP, one of the reasons I learned was that there was this back channel relationship with Oliver North that the management had. We still were pushing our stories forward and getting them out as best we could. I must say to the AP's credit, most of the stories we wrote, sometimes a bit watered down, but they made it out. At that time, we were able to succeed more often than we failed.

**David Barsamian** Does the, what's called the October Surprise, does that figure into this equation?

**Robert Parry** In a way. The October Surprise story goes into whether or not there was a prequel, whether there was a prior relationship between the Republicans and the Iranians that go back to before the 1980 election where, as you remember, Jimmy Carter was President, there'd been hostages taken in Iran then, 52 Americans, and Carter was trying to get them out prior to the election to sort of help himself get re-elected and there'd been allegations from a number of people that the Republicans, particularly Bill Casey who was then directing the Reagan campaign and possibly George Bush, who was the Vice-Presidential candidate were having contacts with Iranians to either frustrate or prevent that release, to make sure Carter would not get re-elected and that Reagan would.

**Robert Parry** Those questions had always floated around a little bit at the point we're talking about in '86, but what's interesting is that as the story begins to unfold in the Fall of '86, we have that point on November 25th of '86, when Attorney General Meese comes out and announces the Iran Contra connection, that money had gone from one to the other. At that point, I think, "My God. This story's finally gonna really come out." The big boys, the big in the media boys are gonna come in really now and get this truth and the Democrats and the Congress will do their job. That was my biggest mistake of all thinking that would happen.

**Robert Parry** At that point, the battles inside AP had gone on so long over these things that when I as offered a job at Newsweek, I left AP and went there. My first week there in February of '87, we did a cover story. The first story I wrote there was about how there was a cover-up being run around Iran Contra out of the Oval Office. At that point, the White House was trying to say North did it on his own. That became the fall-back position. North called it the fall guy position.

**David Barsamian** Was this sort of the loose cannon, rogue elephant?

**Robert Parry** Right, yes this was the idea that Ollie had done this with no one knowing it. That a war was being run out of the old executive office building next to the White House and that the CIA, the NSA, the DIA and all those other guys who we pay a lot of money to, had somehow missed that a war was being waged next door to the White House. That may have seemed incredible and was, but it's what became the position accepted by the Democrats. The same Democrats, Lee Hamilton and those kind of guys, who had covered up for North in the summer of '86 are brought back in '87 to run the Iran Contra investigation. They tell the staff in early '87, this will not go to Ronald Reagan. Ronald Reagan was not implicated, got it? Basically, some of the staff almost resigned at that point, some of the investigators because they knew they're being told to fix an investigation.

**Robert Parry** As this thing plays out on national television and so forth, the fix was in. The Democrats have already agreed they didn't want to have a Constitutional crisis over this. No one wanted another Watergate as they said, and so the fall guy position takes over. We come out of the summer of '87, North is now actually a folk hero, but he's blamed for running this operation with basically no one knowing about it. Bill Casey's dead now, so he can be tossed in as one of the fall guys too, but Reagan wasn't really that responsible. Bush was out of the loop. There was no Contra drug trafficking. This cover-up had moved to a different level.

**Robert Parry** We're faced with that. I'm at Newsweek. Newsweek buys on institutionally to that line. I'm told him way off base thinking Bush was in the loop, that there's a cover-up going on. I must be some sort of a conspiracy nut. It reached the point inside Newsweek that in '88 when I was trying to show Bush's connection to the Iran Contra operations, Newsweek got more and more hostile at the highest levels to my work. It reached the point that at '89, after Bush is elected, I was told by Newsweek that the Oliver North trial was not a news story. I was forbidden to cover the North trial. Of course, it turned out to be a major news story. We weren't there.

**Robert Parry** I arranged to cover the North trial by having daily transcripts prepared and then every night at 11 o'clock, some guy would show up on a motorcycle at my house in Arlington, Virginia and I'd get the day's transcripts and I'd read what happened that day in the courtroom and I'd develop stories off of that, but Newsweek had pretty much decided this was no longer a story, and that if I thought so, I must be not worthy of being in mainstream media.

**Robert Parry** I leave Newsweek in 1990, ironically I'm starting to work on my first book, Fooling America, and I get a call from PBS Frontline. Marty Smith is on the line and he's one of the senior producers. He says, "Gee Bob, we'd like you to look at this October Surprise question." At this point, there'd been more and more interest in whether or not there was that tie-in going back to 1980 and I was very hesitant to take it on, because I'd been through enough. I was tired. I was beaten up. I didn't want to ruin my reputation any further, but I agreed to take it on.

**David Barsamian** You're listening to Robert Parry on the art of investigative journalism. This is Alternative Radio. You can get copies of this program by calling the following toll-free number, 1-800-444-1977. Stay tuned to the end for complete details on ordering.

**Robert Parry** They gave Robert Ross, who was a very talented produced based in New York City, we got a high eight camera and we're sent off to Europe to interview people and around the world, and we did. We're lugging our stuff through airports all over the place. We developed some very interesting information. Not conclusive that there had been an October Surprise interference, but information led us in that direction. Some information went the other way. We tried to deal with it in a very nuanced fashion at Frontline and our show appeared in April of '91, about the same time Gary Sick did his op ed piece for the New York times saying he thought something had happened between the Republicans and the Iranians.

**Robert Parry** This of course again raised new questions for George Bush. Since Bush was possibly implicated in those allegations and those were serious crimes by any standard, because if private citizen George Bush, who was just running for office at that point and private citizen William Casey had taken part in these actions, it was very serious business, and of course in '91, George Bush was the sitting President with roughly 90% approval ratings coming out of the Persian Gulf war.

**Robert Parry** We were doing something that was flying in the face of a lot of power. I think Frontline deserves a lot of credit for having taken it on, but all it got was a lot of grief. A lot of the efforts of the Republicans to cut PBS funding, some of it goes to this. The Neoconservative press rolled in, the New Republic, our pals at Newsweek, who were still sort of mad at me I guess decided they'd trash this whole thing and did. They got all the facts wrong. The New Republic and Newsweek pieces, which came out in November of '91 said that they had alibis for Bill Casey, that Bill Casey could not have been at one of the key meetings in Madrid, Spain because they had him in London that day. When we look at the actual facts, it turned out that they had the wrong days and that Casey was not in London when they put him there. He arrived a day later, he could have gone to Madrid, but now those stories, which were based on that false alibi, were extremely influential.

**Robert Parry** They led most of the media to conclude it was a myth. The Republicans then tried to block any investigation. In the Senate, Bob Dole not running for President, but a filibuster to stop a Senate investigation and successfully did so, although there was a small scale thing that was still done by the subcommittee on the foreign relations side. On the House side, they did approve narrowly, an investigation but then Lee Hamilton, my old friend Lee Hamilton, is appointed to run the investigation and he goes out and he hires Larry Barcella, who is a former public prosecutor, but who also was BCCI's top attorney to run the investigation. What we now know, is that BCCI was deeply implicated in those events in 1980. They were financing some of the people.

**David Barsamian** This is a bank?

**Robert Parry** Yeah, BCCI is the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which was a Middle Eastern based bank, which was involved in the 70s in bribing some of the Carter people, ie: Burt Lance for instance, secretly taking over First American Bank, which his a major bank in Washington using Clark Clifford, the esteemed wise man and his associate Robert Altman as their front man. BCCI was deeply connected to arms trafficking and to drug money laundering through their connections in Pakistan and other places where this was a major problem.

**Robert Parry** We knew from the Iran Contra stuff that Bill Casey had used BCCI in the '83, '84, '85 period for his Iran Contra activities. What we've now learned is that BCCI was active in 1980 with the Republicans in helping to funnel money to key suspects in what's known as the October Surprise issue. To cut this short of shorter, the House Task Force agreed with us that the Newsweek and New Republic alibis were bogus, but then they created bogus alibis of their own. They placed Casey on that key day in late July, instead of in London, they put him at the Bohemian Grove of all places.

**David Barsamian** In California?

**Robert Parry** In Northern California at this exclusive men's resort and it turned out we looked at those facts, actually Frontline, we already looked at those facts and we had learned that Casey was there, but not there that weekend, but the following weekend. The House Task Force got the wrong alibis again. Another alibi they used, they said, "Well, somebody had written down Bill Casey's home phone number on a certain day, so therefore he was home." The testimony was that the guy had called the number and there was no answer. When I approached Barcella with this and I said, "Larry, how can you do an alibi that somebody is at home just because someone wrote down their home number, it doesn't make any sense." They didn't care. At this point, they knew they could roll us and they rolled, not just us, but American history. They falsified the American history, but they got away with it.

**Robert Parry** I had sort of dropped it at that point, but the last phase of this was that a year or so ago, I was told that the Iranians had approached the Clinton people, we're now into the Clinton Administration early on and said, "Listen, we did deal with the Republicans in 1980." This is from Rafsanjani, highest levels of the Iran government conveyed through intermediaries to Clinton. It went to apparently the President himself. The President decided that it wasn't worth following up on. It's old stuff, we're focusing like a laser beam on the economy, et cetera, et cetera, so they never pursued it. That led me to go back to the original raw files of the House Task Force, which I had thought had been a bad job anyway. I got access to these files in an obscure storage room and supposedly just the non-classified stuff.

**Robert Parry** I started ripping open the boxes. It was actually in an abandoned unused ladies room off the Rayburn parking garage on Capitol Hill. There was still the tampon dispenser on the wall, it was really quite a scene. There were these boxes lying there and I started to open them up and not only was there the unclassified stuff, but they left behind, apparently by accident, secret and top secret material. I started taking out these documents and they were remarkable. They were like secret FBI wire taps at one of the suspects', which showed the $3 million payment being arranged by him by a Bush associated lawyer in the Fall of 1980. A payment being brought to this Iranian who was supposedly working for Carter, the guy's name was Cyrus Hashmi. A payment that BCCI was giving to him via Concorde through a courier, obviously a cash payment.

**David Barsamian** What is Concorde?

**Robert Parry** The Concorde. It was a flight coming in from Europe aboard the Concorde. This not the normal way you make deposits in the world. Usually it's a wire transfer or something, but anyway BCCI was flying in money via Concorde to line this guy's pockets. The Houston lawyer calls back after the election and tells Cyrus Hashmi, "I've talked to Bush and the Bush people will fix one of your business problems for you after the inauguration." There was a lot of evidence that was pointing to actual guilt on the October Surprise issue, which the House Task Force had systematically left out. I found secret testimony from a CIA man named Charles Cogan, who was the top CI man in the Middle East. He testified that he was at a meeting with Casey and Joe Reed, which was a David Rockefeller associate, who became ambassador to Morocco in 1981. At this meeting in '81 at Langley, at CIA headquarters, Cogan says they open up the conversation. When Joe Reed says to Bill Casey, "We sure blanked Carter's October Surprise, didn't we?" That was all left out.

**David Barsamian** In your view, has this evidence that you've accumulated over the years, has it moved beyond the tangential state to very solid and irrefutable?

**Robert Parry** Irrefutable is a hard thing to say, but I do think the evidence is now very strong that Bill Casey interfered with the hostage negotiations in 1980 and that there was a major mis-writing, falsification of American history that was carried out as part of this larger cover up that has been going on for years now about what happened in the 1980s. Again, the National Press Corp has failed miserably to deal with any of these questions beyond ridiculing them. We now have extensive government documentation supporting the Casey theory of interference in 1980. We also have, there was a statement from the head of French Intelligence who was Alexandre de Marenches, who was head of French intelligence in 1980. He told his biographer that he had set up the meetings for Casey in Paris with the Iranians. There were three French Intelligence officials corroborating that. This of course matches with some of the allegations from a couple of more unsavory sources.

**Robert Parry** They threw that all out based on utterly implausible and false alibis for Casey and a couple other people. This was not a serious investigation. It was a cover up. I guess the Republicans wanted it to protect legitimacy of the Reagan, Bush period. The Democrats just I suppose didn't want to have a big fight, like they didn't want to have a big fight over Iran Contra, over Contra drugs or over all the other things that were going on in the '80s. Timidity on the part of the Democrats and I think self-interest from the part of the Republicans led to these cover-ups and of course Larry Barcella was so conflicted on this investigation. He headed it, yet he'd made over $2 million representing BCCI as not only a lawyer, but a lobbyist. BCCI's all over these documents in 1980. All the BCCI material was kept out of the report.

**Robert Parry** Barcella was also a law partner with Senator Paul Laxalt. Senator Paul Laxalt was Reagan's intimate in 1980 and Finance Chairman for the 1980 campaign. All the material that points to Laxalt, there's substantial amounts of information that Laxalt had worked with Marcos in the Philippines raising money for the '80 election. That's all left out and Larry Barcella was also close friends with Micheal Adeane, who was a National Security figure in this period, who was also implicated according to these documents in the 1980 stuff and Adeane stuff is left out. There's a systematic pattern where this investigation was not handled properly.

**David Barsamian** One of the salient features of the October Surprise is the extraordinary coincidence of the release date of the hostages. The 52 American hostages who were held at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran.

**Robert Parry** Right, they were released almost immediately after Ronald Reagan was inaugurated President. One could look at that and say it was a coincidence and it might have been. I don't have as much information about exactly why that timing was and I think it may be a mistake to try to tie that in too closely. What I think is important is to stick with the evidence that we have amassed and it is damning that there was interference on the part of the Republicans and it's also disturbing the way that the Congress dealt with this and the way the Washington Press Corp dealt with it in refusing to seriously look at these facts.

**David Barsamian** The famous Watergate question was, what did the President know and when did he know it? What did Reagan know about the Iran Contra, the arms for hostages deal?

**Robert Parry** Reagan was much more a player in all this than people now think. It was funny, because up to '86, everyone said Ronald Reagan was in charge. He was had proven that the Presidency was not too big a job for a man. That was the '84 line. Then after Iran Contra, it was like, "He didn't know what he was doing. He was asleep." That became the line to protect him from impeachment. It was sort of the diminished capacity defense if you will.

**Robert Parry** My view is that Reagan was on these issues was very much involved. Was alert, was interested, approved things at fairly detailed levels. I think he has to carry a lot of the blame for what went on. I think another interesting Watergate comparison though and what is very disturbing to me and I think historically important, is that in Watergate as imperfect as the investigations may have been, they led to an accountability. The President was removed from office for committing crimes. No man was above the law. The Constitution works. Those were the kinds of things we can out of Watergate with. Not all the questions were answered, but that was the overriding result.

**Robert Parry** In Iran Contra, the opposite was true. We had a case where a President committed felonies, the Arms Export Control Act was violated. We dealt with terrorists, there was violations of international law in relation to Nicaragua. All those things went down, but instead of having the senior people of that Administration held accountable, and they were all implicated and I mean not just the President, but the Vice-President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, down the line they were implicated. They misled Congress, they lied to Congress and they basically got away with it. When Judge Walsh, the independent council on this, indicted Caspar Weinberger, the Defense Secretary, the Washington news media attacked Judge Walsh for ruining the fun of Washington. Why is he doing this? Oh, we're tired of this was sort of the media response.

**Robert Parry** What came out of Iran Contra is that the people who got punished the most, who were discredited, like Judge Walsh for doing a fairly honest job. People like me for trying to report it honestly. The message becomes, "Don't tell the truth. Join the cover-up." Really to this day, no one in the Reagan, Bush period was seriously held accountable. No one went to jail. I guess there's one lone CIA guy who did go to jail, Tommy Clines, but none of the key players went to jail. Some got slaps on the wrist. Others were made into folk heroes like Ollie North, so there was no accountability and the fact that we came out of the '80s with all these crimes and I include there the war crimes in Central America that were hidden and covered up and lied about, nobody paid a price.

**Robert Parry** When that happens to a society, it has terrible effects overall. I think much of the reason we now have this terrible distrust in America and this sort of feeling of unease and anger, is that people know the big guys get away with whatever they can and you can't hold them accountable. The public doesn't understand all that happened or how it happened, because no one's really explained it to them, but they do get it at a fundamental level. It plays out in strange ways sometimes, but I think they realize that the game is fixed.

**David Barsamian** One of the notions that became current during this entire period was plausible deniability. What's that?

**Robert Parry** Plausible deniability is something the CIA developed as a concept, which was that if you could somehow fashion a lie to cover your actions, that was okay and that you could do something and when and if you get caught, you just say you didn't do it and there'd be enough muddied water around it so no one could prove it. In fact, what we saw happen during the '80s was a whole bunch of those kinds of plausible deniability things where you had major crimes being committed and then people saying, "Well, Mozote, yes I guess it turned out that they did murder all those kids." To finish that part, in 1991, the U.N. went into El Mozote and excavated the site and found all the skeletons including the children. The little tiny skeletons. At that point, it was incumbent upon the media and on the Congress to hold the people who lied accountable. It was not done. Basically, it was considered too old, who cares?

**Robert Parry** When a war crime is committed at that level, as we've seen in Bosnia, the United States rightly objects to that and rightly wants to prosecute and punish the people responsible for those crimes. What can be said when the United States government covers up, aids and abets the kind of war crimes we saw in Central America? El Mozote is the most proven case and U.S. officials lied to Congress about what they knew on that matter and none of them have been held accountable.

**David Barsamian** CIA covert operations and drug trafficking have been rumored or alleged to accompany each other. Alfred McCoy wrote a classic book, The Politics of Heroin where he documented those allegations in Indochina and later in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Those same allegations come up again in the CIA operations involving Central America. There were reports of guns south, drugs north for example, Contra supply planes flying arms south and coming back with cocaine and landing extraordinarily, if these reports are accurate, at U.S. Air Force bases. Is there any evidence to back that up?

**Robert Parry** Well, yes. As I mentioned earlier, the first Contra drug story was done by the AP, Brian Barger and I wrote it in December of 1985. We had solid evidence then. We didn't go with the story based on just speculation. We did not pursue it that much further because of the attacks we came under. AP was not eager to go forward with that story. Again, the Reagan Administration denied it and said nothing happened and so forth, but an interesting fact occurred, which explains this. There was a problem with a man named Manuel Noriega and he came under indictment. He was then the leader of Panama and he was deeply implicated in the drug trade and the United States indicted him for his involvement in the drug trade. In fact, the United States invaded Panama in 1989 to arrest Noriega. We killed at least a few hundred other people while we're doing the arrest and we brought Noriega back to Miami.

**Robert Parry** Noriega had been recruited by the CIA to help fund the Contras. Many of the allegations that Brian Barger and I had been picking up in '85 related to Noriega's pilots flying their drugs and guns from Panama to the Contra operations in Costa Rica and Honduras and then flying the drugs on to the United States. Here we have those allegations. We have Manuel Noriega indicted and arrested in Miami, but the U.S. government was then faced with a problem. It didn't want to admit the Contra drug thing had happened, yet the witnesses who had been saying the Contra drugs had happened were the same ones who were implicating Noriega and there was no strong case that could be built against Noriega unless they used those witnesses, but those witnesses they had they, were lying about the Contras, because the Contras were the founding fathers. They wouldn't be doing drugs.

**Robert Parry** What happened is there was a strange sort of bifurcation of logic. These witnesses were brought and put on the stand in Miami to prosecute and convict Noriega and they were deemed credible when they described Noriega's involvement with the drug trafficking, but they were also deemed un-credible when they said these flights involved guns to the Contras and were assisted by the Contras. The U.S. government sort of had its cake and ate it too. It was obviously illogical and irrational, but they did it. They said, "These guys are credible when they said Noriega did it, they're not credible when they say the Contras were involved." Of course Noriega was convicted and sent away from a long period of time. There was never any follow up to prosecute the Contra people, who were also implicated by the exact same people who testified against Noriega.

**David Barsamian** One of the characters in the background during this whole period of the '80s is Colin Powell. How does he factor in the Iran Contra scandal?

**Robert Parry** Well, Colin Powell was the military assistant to Caspar Weinberger, who was Defense Secretary and General Powell was much more involved in Iran Contra than people understand. In a sense, you could argue that the Iran Contra scandal could not have happened but for Colin Powell. His involvement has been wildly under reported, under acknowledged for various reasons, probably his popularity, but he basically set up ... First of all, in 1985 when the illegal arms shipments were going forward through Israel to Iran, these were in violations of the Arms Export Control Act, Colin Powell, clearly based on the evidence we now have, was knowledgeable about those illegal shipments and when asked about them under oath later denied knowledge. His testimony is simply not credible based on the evidence.

**Robert Parry** In 1986, when Reagan finally issued and Executive Order on an intelligence finding that in a sense legalized "these shipments", Colin Powell then jerry rigged the supply operations to enable the missiles, the Toe missiles and the Hawk missiles to go forward to Iran outside the normal channels that the Pentagon had for handling covert shipments. The Pentagon had put in relatively new rules to provide some kind of checks and balances on covert shipments. Powell basically waived those rules and set in motion these deliveries that if the Pentagon people who were responsible had known, would have stopped. Powell was able to circumvent the controls so that the shipments went forward.

**Robert Parry** He wasn't just following orders, which is sort of his last line of defense, "I was just a military man following orders." He was in an innovative fashion, was aiding and abetting these shipments, both the ones that were illegal and the ones that were sort of quasi-legal. He's been able to dodge responsibility. In the Walsh final report on Iran Contra, he is criticized for giving what's considered misleading testimony. Walsh was being I think rather mild in his comments. Powell was actually giving testimony that was blatantly untrue.

**David Barsamian** After working for Weinberger, Powell had a major promotion.

**Robert Parry** Well, he left the Pentagon in 1986 for a while to go to a military base to move up in the pecking order of the military and then came back after the Iran Contra scandal broke in '87 to be Deputy National Security Advisor and then '88 to become National Security Advisor. During that time, he played a very let's say, almost a sinister role in both covering up for the Iran Contra scandal and pressuring Congress, this is after Iran Contra, but he helped pressure Congress, he essentially bullied members of Congress to try to get money for the Contras again. In '87 and '88, there were tremendous efforts to renew funding for the Contras and at the center of it was Colin Powell, even though at that point, the world court had found the Contra operation a violation of international law. There were major questions about human rights violations, massacres that the Contras had carried out and the problems with the Contra drug trafficking. Powell examined none of them and simply went ahead and pushed for more money for the Contras to fight the war.

**David Barsamian** Have you had an opportunity to ask him questions about this?

**Robert Parry** I've submitted questions to him about this in connection with a book project that I was working on. He did not respond.

**David Barsamian** You've launched a new independent project. What's that about and how can people find out about it?

**Robert Parry** Probably because I had all these documents that I couldn't find any home for. The documents that I found in the ladies room on October Surprise were really compelling and they were top secret. That used to be stuff that you get on the front page of newspapers, but I couldn't find anyone who wanted them because they had October Surprise connected to them somewhat so they'd say, "Oh no, we can't do that." I went around to a bunch of publications. I started calling these files the October Surprise X-files. Finally, I just said, "Well I'll do it myself. I'll see what I can do." I started to use the internet to anchor this operation and I also wanted to operate as a newsletter, kind of I. F. Stone-ish, so people who didn't like the internet or didn't have access to it could also get it. I called it The Consortium. It publishes bi-weekly and we're selling the newsletter by subscription. The newsletter can be obtained if anyone's interested. It's for a year subscription, we're now doing $49 for a year. You also get a free copy of one of my books if you subscribe.

**David Barsamian** Which book is that?

**Robert Parry** Well, you can get Trick or Treason, which is the book that I did that explained the October Surprise story. I'm also doing a little monograph of the first eight issues, taking the October Surprise X-files and putting them together and people can have their pick if they want one or the other, they can get both if they like. You can send a check or money order if you want to The Media Consortium. It's at Suite 102-231, 2200 Wilson Blvd., Arlington VA 22201.

**David Barsamian** Again, very slowly.

**Robert Parry** Well the Media Consortium is located at Suite 102-231, 2200 Wilson Blvd., Arlington VA 22201.

**David Barsamian** Thanks very much Bob.

**Robert Parry** Thank you David.

**David Barsamian** You were just listening to award-winning reporter Robert Parry on the art of investigative journalism. I talked with him at the Media and Democracy Congress in San Francisco on March 2nd, 1996. As you just heard, Robert Parry is editor of the Consortium, a new independent bi-weekly investigative newsletter. This program is produced by Alternative Radio, celebrating its 10th year of national and international broadcasting. AR brings you such diverse voices as Howard Zinn, Barbara Ehrenreich, Winona LaDuke, Frances Fox Piven and Urvashi Vaid. [inaudible 00:57:10] order for the program you just heard. I'm David Barsamian. Thank you for listening.
