**Dan Hardway** I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you and the chance to be here. Of all the people speaking at this conference I'm probably the least knowledgeable of all of them, and I say that in regard to the substance of the information available about the Kennedy assassination in all of its aspects, including the Mexico City and what happened there in the fall of '63. Since my time with the HSCA and for those of you who don't know me, I was an investigator for a House Select Committee on assassinations, team five. All the time since then I really have not followed the developments in the case very closely. I've been too busy trying to make a living and raise kids.

**Dan Hardway** Between 1979 when I left their employment and my first contact from Jeff Morley about George Joannides, I believe I only spoke to one author or critic and I spoke to him off the record. All my personal notes, my diaries, my documents and everything that I'd retained from my time with the committee were stolen from my apartment in a burglary in 1981. Nothing else was taken. At this point 35 years after the fact of my work with the committee, I am not sure that I have a lot to contribute to the current knowledge base which has moved far beyond where we were in 1979.

**Dan Hardway** I have memories but they're 35 years old. I have not had the time to really do a lot of research into the records, nor do I have the skill to do that research adequately, and I don't claim to be an expert on any aspect of the assassination investigation or the substance. I've done my best to try to refresh my recollection so that I can put the memories that I have into some kind of context, and in doing so in preparation for this presentation I did review some of the information about Oswald in Mexico City, David Phillips and some of the broader areas of inquiry that I was interested in back in '77 and '78.

**Dan Hardway** I also found some memos and correspondence that I'd never seen at the time, or that I had largely forgotten. Matter of fact a couple of them I found and I thought I'd never seen it and found something else where I'd replied to it in '78. I'm not going to try to comment too much on the substance of the areas of the investigation, but I want to take you back with me a little bit in time to what it was like when we first started investigating under the HSCA, and started by filling in redactions in the FOIA documents because we had, contrary to what Mister Tanenbaum just said, we had unexpurgated access to CIA documents. We were the first to ever have that, and as far as I know we're the only ones who ever had that.

**Dan Hardway** I want to then take you up through the HSCA investigation from the perspective of someone that worked daily with the CIA in the CIA on the CIA, and that's what I did. While we waited for negotiations between the committee and the agency for some kind of an agreement on document access, because Bob Blakey refused to accept expurgated access as well, but instead of trying to force a constitutional confrontation which no member on the committee was sure that they wanted to have, especially after they had been cowed by the Sprague affair, he worked out an agreement whereby we were to get that unexpurgated access.

**Dan Hardway** While we was waiting on it, we tried to familiarize ourselves with all the critical work, with all the FOIA documents that had been released redacted, and generally try to learn as much as we could before we actually got started. We didn't get our unexpurgated ... I went to work there on July 7th, 1977, and we didn't get our access to the documentation until September. In the meantime one of the things that really stands out in my memory of one of the things that happened while we were waiting for that agreement so that I could really get to work, they sent me to Jacksonville with Gaeton Fonzi to interview William Burkholder Smith.

**Dan Hardway** We walked in and we had these nice little leather cases with our credentials and everything, and we walked in and we gave our credentials to Mister Smith and told him who we were and why we were there, and Mister Smith flipped them back to us and said, "So you represent the Congress. What the F is that to the CIA? You'll be gone in a few years, but the CIA will still be there." That really sums up a lot of the problems that we had. We thought we had unprecedented access to the files, and we did. The deal was that we could see any file we requested so long as we saw it at Langley and that nothing left Langley except what we could carry in our heads.

**Dan Hardway** Our notes stayed at Langley. Any documents we produced at Langley stayed there. We weren't allowed to take anything in with us except our notepaper and pens. We had to leave the notepaper there when we left. We could take nothing back out with us. At the time we thought that eventually this would be released at the end of the committee, that our work would be released. In the short term we proved to have misapprehended that. In the long term I think we've been proven right. Most of it is out, and a lot of it's destroyed but we'll talk about that.

**Dan Hardway** At the time I didn't really have any idea or real understanding of the political realities that the committee was functioning in in that situation after the Sprague affair. I didn't have any understanding of how cowed the committee really was. Given the limitations, Bob negotiated us a good agreement. Once we got access to the unredacted documents under the working agreement, one of the first things I did was ask for unredacted copies of all the FOIA documents that I'd read. Being able to fill in the blanks in those FOIA documents answered a lot of questions, discredited a lot of speculation, but overall raised many more questions than it answered. It also gave us a starting point for our inquiry.

**Dan Hardway** At that point as far as I know we were the first people from outside the agency to see those documents in unexpurgated form. There is no question that Ed and I, Eddie Lopez, my partner and I were novices. We were rising second year law students. We had no intelligence background or knowledge. We had to learn as we went. Once we had unexpurgated access to documents at Langley we tried to quickly learn the cryptonyms, the file designations, the systems and how to decipher the routing slips and the structure of the CIA. As we dug for documents we quickly learned that the routing instructions would often give us as much information and very good clues as to where to look next, and the information we got from the routing slips was sometimes as good as the information in the document.

**Dan Hardway** We ran a lot of rabbit trails that way, but we also learned how to use that kind of information as a check on what we were getting from the agency. After the access agreement went into effect I began to spend most of my days at the agency. Initially our minder was a gay named Regis Blahut, the agency officer who was later fired for fingering the autopsy report or the autopsy photos after a CIA safe was set up at the office. Regis at one point early in the process pitched me on a career in the CIA. I have no idea whether that was authorized or whether it was just something that Regis did on his own.

**Dan Hardway** He asked me if I had considered applying for a career with the agency once I got my law degree. He was very complimentary. He told me that he thought I could have a great career with the agency, and that I wouldn't have any problem getting a job thereafter if I was interested. I told him I was not interested. I reported the contact to Mickey Blakey. I filled out the contact report form and put it into the committee files, and I don't really claim to know my way around all the research sites, but so far I've not been able to find that contact report.

**Dan Hardway** My primary assignment on task force five was to research and investigate the CIA's awareness of Lee Harvey Oswald's activities in Mexico City, what they knew, when they knew it, and when they reported it. Implicit in the assignment was the issue of whether Mexico City indicated any operational connection between Oswald and the agency. I also had an understanding with Bob Blakey that I could look into other matters. At this point I have to tell you I have a kind of a special relationship with Bob. I was one of his students at Cornell that he invited to go down to the committee with us, and consequently, but I'll talk a little more about that later.

**Dan Hardway** The agreement that I had with him was that as long as I did the Mexico City part that he wanted me to look into for the final report, because Bob knew from the beginning that this was a congressional committee, and that as a congressional committee the only thing it was ever going to produce was a report and possibly legislation, and hopefully, and Bob went into it with this hope along with us, that there would be a referral to the Justice Department for further investigation, which in fact there was, which the Justice Department didn't do anything with. The things that I wanted to look into were things like Bill Harvey, David Phillips, ZR Rifle, Mitch Werbell.

**Dan Hardway** I had his okay and his backing as long as I did the work that was necessary for the final report. We had conversations. We tried to urge him to do more investigation of the potential conspirators and possible likely suspects. I'm not like Mark Lane, I believe suspects are named day in and day out before they go to trial. If we did not name suspects until after they had been convicted, we'd have a secret system and I don't think we want that. I'll be honest with you, I considered Bill Harvey and Dave Phillips to be potential conspirators from the beginning.

**Dan Hardway** From September of 1977 through late July/early August of 1978 we had unexpurgated access to CIA documents. We had an office, a little cubicle at the CIA where we got those documents. Initially we dealt with Regis Blahut who would bring those documents to us at our request. If we could identify a file, they would find it and bring it to us. Regis eventually got sent down to the house headquarters when they put an office in down there for CIA documents, but Eddie and I still had to do our work at the CIA, and our files were maintained at the CIA because of the volume of files that we were churning through, and we were churning through a lot of files.

**Dan Hardway** When Regis left they gave us two other people who basically were ... I have no idea who they were at this point or what their positions were. What I understood their position and their job to be was to go get us files. I've been accused of being young and arrogant and I was probably, and aggressive. We were aggressive in our requests. We were aggressive in expecting the files to be produced quickly, and we kept pressure on to do that, and we had Bob Blakey's backing through the whole thing to do it, and we had an agreement that required them to do it. We were getting files in a matter of days after we would request them.

**Dan Hardway** If we could identify it from another file, we could request the file we were looking for and we could get it, and I did for that period. We produced fairly voluminous notes that were there, kept there. In the Lopez report you'll see all kinds of footnotes to researcher notes. Those are footnotes into the notes that we took and kept at the agency. They always produced something whether or not it was actually what it was supposed to be we can't be absolutely sure, but given the timeframes that they produced it in they weren't getting a lot of time to review and purge the files that we got.

**Dan Hardway** If you've read the Lopez report, you know that we did not always or even usually get what we were looking for although we always during this period got something. This applied not just to Mexico City inquiries we were digging into, but other areas as well. We often would find documentation in places other than where you would think that you would find it. I think we found a lot of the documentation we found because they didn't have time to coordinate and purge files and figure out what we were doing before we got there.

**Dan Hardway** In the initial stages of the investigation when we were there almost every day dealing directly with the people, we were going after files aggressively. We were asking for different files in different areas in addition to the concentration on Mexico City, and the scatter gun approach that we took to asking for files made it a little more difficult I think for them to realize and figure out exactly where it was going and what we were looking at or trying to like at. While it seems clear to me that the CIA vets files before they release them, they don't always get everything out of the file that they should.

**Dan Hardway** For example, whoever vetted George Joannides' 201 file before they released it to Jeff Morley certainly didn't get the things out that they thought they should have, and I'm sure in hindsight they regret what they released. Another occurred when Charles Burke and I interviewed a guy named Barney Hidalgo, the only guy I met in the whole investigation that actually scared me. I reviewed his personnel files before the interview, and while my memo on that is a publicly released document.

**Dan Hardway** He was interviewed in July '78 after we had learned that he claimed to know both David Phillips and Maurice Bishop, and to have seen both of them at headquarters and that they were not the same person, which incidentally the report from Barney came to us very shortly after Gaeton had interviewed David Phillips' brother in Texas. David Phillips' brother had confirmed that the sketch looked like David and everything, and the pressure was back on Phillips again. He thought he was past it at that point, and John McCone had acknowledged in his interview that there was an employee named Maurice Bishop.

**Dan Hardway** All of a sudden Barney Hidalgo shows up and says, "I know Maurice and I know David, and David is not Maurice but I know both of them." If you've not read Barney Hidalgo's interview which has been released, it's fascinating reading. It's a beautiful DI operation. The thing that I found most interesting about the interview is not in the report, I didn't report it because it wasn't connected with what we were doing on the assassinations. They had not taken out his commendation. He had received the highest commendation possible for a CIA officer, and it was still on his 201 file when I reviewed his 201 file.

**Dan Hardway** After our interview was over and we turned off the tape recorders and closed the notebooks and we're just sitting there at the table finishing up the interview, I looked at him and I ask him, I said, "What was it like to do a hard defection of a German general from East Germany?" Because that's what he got the award for. Those of you who are not familiar with parlance, a hard defection is a kidnapping. At that point Barney Hidalgo exploded. I mean he went livid. He went red in the face, and he said, "They promised me that you would not be shown that."

**Dan Hardway** We left fairly quickly. His CIA handler, there was a CIA handler in the room with him during that interview, and as I said, what I saw on his file, he was the only one I ever met that I was really scared of. You can see another example of their attempt to hide documents in Lopez's report's discussion of the impulse camera that covered the Cuban Consulate. They had given us what we thought was unexpurgated access to the project file on the coverage from the Cuban Consulate. As a check on that we were given operational ... As a check on what we were given in the operational or the project file or other substance of the files, we requested the chronological dispatch file between Mexico City and headquarters.

**Dan Hardway** Interestingly enough the technician who covered the photographic operation filed monthly reports. While the project file had most of the monthly reports, the one covering the month of September '63 was missing. We found that monthly report in the dispatch chronology file. Whoever purged that before they got it to us missed it. The agency was not able to remove HMMA22307 from the chronological file, while it had been removed from the project file. If we'd not asked for the chronological file, which we found out about from another document where we found the reference and therefore had asked for it, we would have never seen HMMA22307.

**Dan Hardway** [HMA22307 00:19:52] is the dispatch that indicates that the impulse camera was tested for a period that was to last four to eight days beginning on 27 September 1963. It promised that the film would be sent to headquarters' technical service division. HMA22307 was dated 18 of October 1963. On 18 October 1963 they had the production from the impulse camera. The next dispatch monthly report sent in November that we did find in the project file enclosed samples of the photographs taken by the impulse cameras. It also reported that the impulse camera had generated 10 feet of 16 millimeter film. We never saw those photos.

**Dan Hardway** A dispatch sent from Mexico to headquarters in June of '64 states that the negatives from the impulse camera were being sent to headquarters along with five packages of undeveloped film. The dispatch reports that they were sent in a numbered transmittal manifest, different type of document. Our attempts to track that manifest were a dead end because the CIA flatly told us that manifests are unaccountable, although they are sequentially numbered. If you believe that, I've got a healthcare system to sell you. The monthly report for December on this operation was not provided to us until November 16th 1978.

**Dan Hardway** We didn't get it in the operational file. We didn't get it in the chronology. We were trying to finalize the report at that point, and it had been in neither the project file or the dispatch chronology. This one came to light as we fought with the agency about the content of the final report. At that point the agency was trying to discredit me and Eddie and the report that we had written with the members of the committee. Stansfield Turner wrote a letter to Chairman Stokes on 25 October 1978 that on September 27th, or at some time not long thereafter there was test photography of the entrance of the consulate.

**Dan Hardway** He went on to claim that we had seen the production of the testing of the camera and that was not true. I haven't been able to find Director Turner's letter, but I wrote a memo to Chairman Stokes rebutting the claims in that letter, and Chairman Stokes responded to the 25 October letter on the basis provided in my memo raising concerns about the coverage of the Cuban Consulate and the Soviet Embassy. The Soviet Embassy was covered by two photographic installations. They produced the production, the photos of one of those operations and never produced the other one. We never saw a single photo from the second coverage facility.

**Dan Hardway** Admiral Turner responded on 30 November 1978, and his response addressed only the coverage at the Cuban Consulate and didn't say anything about the issues we raised about the Soviet coverage. In that letter in November 30th, he told Chairman Stokes that I had seen HMMA22726 which was the January or the December report that we did not see until shortly after this process started, but that I had "acknowledged" that I "could not recall seeing some of the dispatches." Admiral Turner closed that letter to Chairman Stokes by expressing his hope that "hope that you can accept this letter as the final assurance" of the agency's integrity in cooperating with the committee.

**Dan Hardway** I responded to that letter from Stansfield Turner with a memo to the file which is worth quoting at some length to illustrate how things went when we tried to tie down the CIA documents especially after they had cut off our unexpurgated access. I said generalities are often misleading. I stated that I did not recall seeing one dispatch concerning the pulse camera. That dispatch, HMMA2272611664 was definitely not in the unexpurgated project files or dispatch chronologies that I reviewed. I did not see the dispatch in any of the files that I reviewed after Mister Breckenridge began giving them to us in an unexpurgated form either, but as I pointed out at the time, I cannot say what was in those files because I only saw what Mister Breckenridge or one of his functionaries deemed that I should see.

**Dan Hardway** I have no way of knowing what was in the sealed envelopes in those files, hence it is possible that there is a cover sheet with my signature on the file that contained this dispatch, but I did not see the dispatch. It should be noted that I pointed out that just such a possibility was inherent in the situation when Mister Breckenridge reneged on the memorandum of understanding's provision for unexpurgated access. It should also be noted that the two dispatches which I discovered that deal with the pulse cameras were in two separate files. One was located in the project file and the other was in the dispatch chronology.

**Dan Hardway** Note that my response to this letter had been directed, or to the October letter had been directed to the members of the committee. This memo went to the files. I'm actually surprised that both of these memos have survived. This was close to the end. Admiral Turner's response to Chairman Stokes' letter didn't even bother to address the issues related to the Soviet Embassy. The committee decided that they could not negotiate even a revised or a redacted version of the Lopez report with the CIA and the effort was abandoned. The report remained completely classified until 1993, and is still only released in redacted form, and by the time of my last memo on that issue I was fully disillusioned which comes across pretty strongly in the memo.

**Dan Hardway** As reflected in that memo, at the time Bob Blakey and Scott Breckenridge had "informalized the process of vetting our report, and it was obvious to us that it was not going to go anywhere." Shortly after this memo was written I left Washington and went back to law school. My disillusion with the committee's support for our work or even their interest in that matter had started to set in when we started having executive session hearings. Bob Tanenbaum was totally incorrect this afternoon when he said that Dave Phillips was not called back before the committee. He was.

**Dan Hardway** Interestingly enough Bob Tanenbaum's cross examination of David Phillips has been publicly released and is available at Mary Ferrell. When we called David Phillips back before the committee that transcript has not been released. It's still classified as far as I can tell, either that or my research skills on the public access sites aren't good enough for me to have been able to find it, but if anyone knows that it's been released please let me know.

**Speaker 2** [inaudible 00:27:04].

**Dan Hardway** Okay. The testimony hasn't but ...

**Speaker 2** The testimony.

**Dan Hardway** Where my disillusion had started setting in is when we put David Phillips back in front of the committee, and I don't recall today whether it was a full committee or just the Kennedy sub-committee. I think it was probably the Kennedy sub-committee. What we did was, and I had, having unexpurgated access to the files, I'd went back and what David Phillips told Tanenbaum and the committee originally the first time he testified was the same story he tells in Night Watch: I signed off on it. We reported him being at the Cuban Embassy, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. By the time we called him back, I had the documentation to prove that he hadn't even been in Mexico City when Oswald was there, that he wasn't even there when the first cable was sent, and that he had lied through his teeth.

**Dan Hardway** We put him in front of the committee. We took him through, and up to that point as far as we knew there had been no referral of perjury for him because there wasn't any evidence really to base it on. We now had it. He'd lied through his teeth. We took him through his testimony that he had sworn falsely. He reiterated his testimony, and when we got through with confronting him with the evidence that showed that he was lying, he acknowledged that he had misled the committee, and Mickey Goldsmith, the attorney. He was the attorney doing the questioning. After all, I was just a wet behind the ears, callow, young law student. I was sitting there beside him.

**Dan Hardway** I'd done the research, but he was doing the questioning. When he was done he looked at the committee and said, "If this would be a good time for any questions of the committee." Me and him were basically breathless. We were excited. We had just shown him to be guilty of perjuring himself, of lying to Congress, and Chairman Pryor who was one of the few committee members I ultimately respected, looked around at the committee and said, "Well, seeming that there's no questions, this would be a good time to break for lunch." And adjourned the committee. I looked at Mickey. Mickey looked at me. We were shocked.

**Dan Hardway** We went back to the office. We asked for a referral to the Justice Department for lying to Congress. We lobbied for it for a couple of weeks and we were told to drop it. This was not a result of Bob Blakey or a staff inadequacy. It was a result of the fact that the committee members at that point had been so cowed that they weren't going to do anything of that kind of confrontational nature. Same thing, we wanted Annie Goodpasture, we didn't even bother to ask that she be referred.

**Speaker 3** Dan, have you ever wanted to-

**Speaker 4** Wait [crosstalk 00:30:22].

**Dan Hardway** When the CIA reneged. I'll take questions. Hopefully I'll have time for them. When the CIA reneged on matters in addition to Mexico City, reneged on the unexpurgated access I was looking into matters other than Mexico City. I believe it was these areas that resulted in the CIA mounting an operation against us, a covert operation, something that they've admitted in a sworn affidavit that they did. The affidavit is filed in a federal court case. As part of the Mexico City research I was able to take a hard look at David Phillips and his activities. I was looking hard at his disinformation connections and his disinformation operations and his history.

**Dan Hardway** As a result of discovering the transmittal manifest that the film production went up in as well as the Sloman cable, I began looking hard into back channel communication methods, and I was having a hard time accepting and believing that they didn't keep a record of the back channel communications or have any way of tracking those things, and I was pressing hard on that issue. I wanted to find out more about how they did that. I began pressing hard for David Phillips' travel vouchers, his operational files, his expense reports. I identified sources of disinformation on stories coming out of Miami and New Orleans in the days following the assassination, started asking for files that would link those sources to Phillips.

**Dan Hardway** I went back through my previous research on him looking for such connections. I believed and I still do believe that the assassination bore earmarks of an intelligence operation. Looking at it that way I thought that a way to try to unravel it would be to look at the disinformation portion of the operation which is a standard portion of an agency operation and try to work back from that. I expected compartmentalization, but I suspected that identifying an actual officer who tied the DEI efforts together would at least help us confirm that it was an operation.

**Dan Hardway** Most of the DI came from identifiable intelligence sources, and those sources were accountable to one officer, and I felt that it would be hard for naysayers to use the opportunistic excuse for DI, that's the fallback position in the DI cover-up that, "Well, you know, yeah, our agents and our assets did it, but they just took advantage of the fact of trying to make lemonade out of lemons, if you will." Take a bad thing that happened, try to turn it to our advantage. In other words if that was that coordinated, that quick, and as detailed it would be reasonable to infer that it had been laid on in advance.

**Dan Hardway** I identified the sources of the stories that came out immediately after the assassination with detailed information on Oswald and his pro-Castro activities, and I started asking for the CIA files on all those sources. I got a lot of them before we lost access, but I did not get them all. That's one of the things I was really pressing on when I got shut down. In the same period I'd also found a reference to a CIA debriefing of Johnny Roselli after Drew Pearson published his piece about Castro turning the assassins sent to kill him around and sending them back to kill Kennedy.

**Dan Hardway** I asked for the records of the debriefing. That was part of what I was looking into with Bill Harvey. That's how I came across that. I very clearly remember some of the details about this. The debriefing happened at a CIA safe house over a period of two weeks in 1967. Sheffield Edwards was one of the debriefers. He was brought out of retirement, I think, in order to do that. I think I remember that he was brought out of retirement. That's when the CIA changed the procedures on us. They brought George Joannides out of retirement to be the new liaison for me and Ed primarily.

**Dan Hardway** He closed our office at Langley. The agency set up a safe room for us to use at the committee offices. I no longer had direct contact with any CIA employees to request files. All further requests for documents and files had to be in writing through official channels; files that were not produced for weeks after being requested. My whole inquiry into areas outside and inside the scope of my portfolio ground to a halt. We soon thereafter lost unexpurgated access entirely. Long and short on the Roselli debriefing I was told eventually that Gary Corn- ... I was given expurgated access to it. Matter of fact it was the first expurgated document I was handed.

**Dan Hardway** It happened out at the old meeting room that I had in the CIA, and was one of the few times that I'm sure that I met George Joannides. Eddie remembers meeting George a lot, he says, but I don't remember that many times meeting him, but I know I met him that time, because when I walked in it was just me, him, and Scott Breckenridge. They handed me the file. It was about two inches, two and a half inches thick. I sat down at the desk and they stood there grinning, which struck me as unusual, but I thought, "Well, maybe they don't trust me to look at the file without them present." Because usually whoever delivered the file to me would leave and let me work on it.

**Dan Hardway** They were standing there grinning in anticipation, and I opened it and not only was the document expurgated, instead of taking the document and blacking out the lines on the copy which was what they always did, they had retyped the whole document leaving white spaces where things were left out. I blew up. I left. After the committee issued a subpoena, they agreed to let Gary Cornwall see it unexpurgated. Gary went out there one day in the middle of trying to get the final report written with 20 things on his agenda to be done, maybe stayed about two hours. He's out of the office about two hours. I know because I was waiting for him to get back because I wanted to find out what he'd seen.

**Dan Hardway** When he came back in he said, "It doesn't have anything to do with what you're working on on the final report. Forget it." That was the end of it. That was the end of it until I went before the Assassination's Record Review Board, which I was subpoenaed before to testify. After they had asked me about all the documents they wanted to ask me about, they asked me if there was anything else that they should ask me about that they had not asked me about. I told them about the debriefing of Johnny Roselli, about Sheffield Edwards' involvement, about Harvey believing that it came through the Harvey files. They said that they would search for that because it certainly sounded interesting and relevant and something that should be disclosed.

**Dan Hardway** They later had the kindness to get back to me to tell me that there was no record of any such file having ever existed or having ever been requested by the House Select Committee on Assassinations. Interestingly enough preparing for this presentation, and I've got to tell you about this one. I spent a lot of the time that I spent getting ready for this looking for some indication that that file actually existed. I did find this other file that was written on March 29th, 1967, which is right around the same time that Roselli was being debriefed, a few weeks after the article first appeared.

**Dan Hardway** It's a memo. It's a one page memo about the Johnny matter or the Johnny case. It's from Howard Osborn, the director of security, which is where I got into this in the first place was Bill Harvey's security files. It's a memorandum for the record. It's a CYA memo. This is one of the documents that it amazes me that it ever saw the light of day. In this memo Mister Osborn notes that he was approached by the inspector general who was trying to locate William Harvey. Mister Osborn then asked the IG why he needed to locate him. The IG told him that the director, Richard Helms, "Had instructed him to investigate any and all aspects of the Johnny case."

**Dan Hardway** The director of security referred him to the person whom he said knew the most about it, and promised that he, the DOS, would give him "all documentation held by me." The memo doesn't end there. The IG left, and the DOS records that he immediately went to see Richard Helms. He told Helms about the IG visit. He notes that he, quote, and I'm going to quote the memo here: "He told him that I assumed I had his approval to take this action since I considered myself currently under his admonition to bury this material.

**Dan Hardway** "He said that he was glad that I had checked with him and that he fully approved my action. It seems that the White House, Congress, and Drew Pearson are digging into the allegation that the agency played a role in an attempt to assassinate Castro, and he wants to be in a position to say that his inspector general has investigated the matter thoroughly." What wonderfully, masterful, bureaucratic, ambiguous phrasing. What is it that the director of intelligence, Richard Helms, fully approved? Was it the DOS agreement to turn over materials to the IG, which had not happened yet, or the DOS' burying of the materials that he had previously been admonished to do by Helms?

**Dan Hardway** Along the same lines we have to note that the director of security did not record that Helms wanted the matter investigated fully. What he wanted was "to be in a position to say that his inspector general had investigated the matter thoroughly." I also found it interesting that according to this memo one of the members of the IG team that was doing this investigation was none other than the HSCA's CIA minder Scott Breckenridge, who constantly assured us that the CIA had thoroughly searched their records and responded to our requests and cooperated with our investigation, and that they had done so thoroughly.

**Dan Hardway** I confronted David Phillips in an interview on August 24th, 1978, in our offices, not long after Barney Hidalgo and John McCone's statement of having remembered Bishop. He was extremely agitated by the line of questioning that I did on the sources of the disinformation after the assassination, and the fact that I could track them all back to being either current or past agents that he had used, assets that he had used. He was forced to admit that many of the sources were not only former assets that he had managed in prior years in the early 60s, but they were also assets that he was personally managing in the fall of 1963.

**Dan Hardway** He was asked but could not explain why the information came from anti-Castro Cuban groups and individuals pointing to Cuban connections all seemed to come from his assets that he handled personally, but he acknowledged that that was the case. He also acknowledged that back channel communication methods existed between Mexico City and headquarters and Miami. Our information and access was cut off, and we were running out of time and we were unable to pursue that inquiry further. While that seemed to shake him, he did not really ... At one point he had three cigarettes lit during that part of the investigation.

**Dan Hardway** That investigation was me, Charles Burke, and Gaeton Fonzi. I did all the questioning. The other two were there just kind of to help us take notes. He had three cigarettes lit at one point. The one question that I would love to have an answer to that I have never been able to settle in my own mind is whether David Phillips was actually that nervous, or rather that was all staged for our benefit. With David Phillips you'll never know, because he was that good. He was that good of an actor. Another document that seemingly ceased to exist in the official records was my memorandum of that August 1978 interview.

**Dan Hardway** However a researcher has been kind enough to give me a copy of it. I have no idea where he got it from. It's obviously not an official record. It's not my copy because my copy was stolen, and it's not a copy of my stolen copy because mine was a carbon copy, and this is a copy of the original document. It's out there. If you want a copy of that and don't have it, let me know. I would be glad to send it to you. It's not complete. The bottom of the page is cut off on each page on the copies, but you can tell a lot from it. The problem is that most of the information, the briefing book that I prepared and all the notes that Gaeton and Charles Burke and I prepared for that long interview, we had him in there the whole afternoon, apparently no longer exists in the report.

**Dan Hardway** The typed memorandum is a summary that really doesn't do a whole lot of good without that briefing book and those notes. A July 13th '78 memo for the record by Scott Breckenridge indicates that he had reached an agreement with Bob Blakey about the agency maintaining control of the documents that we were generating and he recorded base- ... He says that upon completion of the report all working papers will be destroyed, so I think that the chances of my notes having survived are probably slim and none, and slim probably has left town.

**Dan Hardway** I felt when the interview with Phillips was over that I'd gone just about as far as we could go. We weren't getting any access of any significance and that brings us back to Joannides, and the disinformation operation ran by the CIA. Ran by the CIA against the House Select Committee. They considered my research and my request to be "aggressive harassment." That's in a memo they wrote to our bosses about me and Eddie. The agency worked hard to discredit me and Ed in the eyes of our bosses long before their letter to Turner. On August 18th, 1978, Breckenridge met with Gary Cornwall and told him that Ed and I "labored under a burden of credibility in the agency, and are so callow that we," the CIA, "did not want to trust them with the kind of information they were seeking."

**Dan Hardway** In their view we were young, inexperienced, immature, and overly aggressive. I guess we just didn't demonstrate the respect for them and their secrets that they thought they deserved. The kind of information we were seeking, Bob speculated to the committee that the kind of information they were concerned about may have been either that "they are terribly concerned that we were looking into something, and we'll find something wrong, or we are touching on very sensitive issues of agency performance and sensitive sources and methods."

**Dan Hardway** I believe they were terribly concerned, and that's why Breckenridge, who had the background in the Roselli affair and was well versed on that danger, brought in Joannides, who, as I was to learn in the very late 90s/early 2000s from Jeff Morley, was very well versed on the danger of the inquiry into the disinformation operations that I was looking into. Joannides served ... In an affidavit the CIA has filed with a federal court in Jeff Morley's law suit, the CIA admits that George Joannides ... Just let me read it to you. "The CIA acknowledge Joannides."

**Dan Hardway** This is a quote from a sworn affidavit from the CIA. "They acknowledge Joannides participated in a covert action codenamed JMWAVE from 1962 through 1964. Second, the CIA acknowledge Joannides served as CIA representative to the House of Representatives Select Committee on Assassinations from 1978 through 1979. Joannides served undercover in both these operations." They lied to us. They told us that he had no involvement in any aspect of the CIA. They told us in advance that they had ceased funding the DRE in 1962, and that they had no connections with the DRE in 1963.

**Dan Hardway** George Joannides was the DRE case officer who brought them under control in the spring and early summer of 1963, and who received commendations for them running excellent propaganda operations in the fall of 1963. George Joannides was in charge of anti-Cuban propaganda operations and disinformation operations out of the JMWAVE station in 1963, and had to have had a very direct and very intimate working relationship with one David Phillips. The agency did not trust us with the kind of information we were seeking, and they brought out of retirement someone who knew where to not let us look and he shut us down.

**Dan Hardway** In his annual review his boss at the CIA wrote regarding "the firm position Joannides took with the young investigators" that "if the peculiar nature of the work did not call on Mister Joannides for all the talents of his wide experience, it nonetheless was his experience and quick perceptions that ensured a superior performance." Indeed. His experience told him what to keep us away from, and our requests once slowed allowed him to quickly perceive where we were trying to go. I only regret that we were not able to mount more of a challenge to his talents.

**Dan Hardway** Bob Blakey has called what the CIA did obstruction of justice. Ed and I knew all along what they were doing and we complained long and hard to our supervisors including Bob. Bob has since said, "I wrote off their complaints. I was wrong. The researchers were right." Small comfort in light of the fact that it's been 50 years and there's still no truth and no accountability from the agency. Future researchers and historians however should follow Bob in evaluating any information from this case that comes from the CIA, either directly or indirectly, as a form of continuing propaganda.

**Dan Hardway** Bob said, "I now no longer believe anything the agency told the committee any further than I can obtain substantial corroboration for it from outside the agency for its veracity." I still believe it's probable that there was operational involvement in the assassination. I still believe that at the time a hard look into Bill Harvey and the post-assassination disinformation operation was the best chance of unraveling that involvement. If you look at that interview I did with Phillips in August of '78, it was kind of like if you look at it as a poker game. When we came down to it I had a deuce in the hole and they weren't wild.

**Dan Hardway** The ace that I had been looking for was still in George Joannides' breast pocket. We may never know how closely they worked together. In September and October Phillips was TDY in DC and Miami, and I have to wonder. I have to wonder what they talked about. If you'll allow me a little bit of speculation. This case has been marred by way too much speculation, but if you'll allow me just a little bit of speculation for an old cynic, I'd like to offer some in regard to Bob Blakey's working arrangement with the CIA. I think the CIA underestimated Bob. I think they thought he was totally containable given the political constraints under which he operated, the timidity of the committee after it had been cowed by the Sprague affair, and Bob's understanding of those constraints and limitations.

**Dan Hardway** Bob took what he had to work with and did the best he could in those circumstances to move the case as far along as was possible. If you'll excuse my partisanship, he did a damn good job, because we wouldn't be here today if he had not negotiated that agreement giving us unexpurgated access. We would still be complaining about having never seen even a single unexpurgated document. They thought they would have a tame investigation. That's what they thought. The one thing they didn't count on was that he had enough of a question about them and their role that he was willing to give me and Eddie the freedom and, at least through the beginning until it really got down to our time and money crunch at the very end of the committee, he gave us the support we had to have in order to dig as hard as we dug.

**Dan Hardway** The limitations on how much we were able to get was our youth and our inexperience and the fact that we were learning as we go, not a lack of support from Bob. There was some limitation from the lack of support from the committee, but then again had the committee supported us in a lying to Congress charge against Phillips, we would have probably lost the unexpurgated access a lot sooner. Bob has since acknowledged that "the researchers did not trust the agency." Indeed, that is precisely why they were in their positions. When he hired me that was a condition of my leaving law school and going with him: I got to work on investigating the agency.

**Dan Hardway** At the beginning we had strong backing from Bob and a lot of leeway in what we were doing at the agency, and I think that we got more than they ever expected to disclose, and when they realized what we were doing and where we were going and what we were going to find out, they shut us down. Jeff has litigated for 12 years trying to get the same documents and not a single one of them has been released, and the case is over and they're still classified and top secret. It's been 35 years. I'm not optimistic that I will ever know the truth about the CIA's involvement in the assassination or with Oswald in my lifetime. I am not at all sure that anyone who was not part of any such involvement ever will either.

**Dan Hardway** At this point it's become a matter of historical research, and those who control the documentary record control the history. One conclusion however I think we can all safely draw from this, and that is that government secrecy is a cancer destroying our nation and our freedom and our society. Thank you. Jim. We promised Jim.

**Speaker 5** I have two quick questions. First of all did you say you wanted to indict Goodpasture for perjury also?

**Dan Hardway** Mickey and I wanted to refer her for perjury as well. We did not have as strong a case against Annie as we did against David, but we wanted to refer her as well, but we didn't even bother because if we couldn't get David with the case we had against him, we knew we had no chance of convincing [crosstalk 00:55:47].

**Speaker 5** But you did want to refer?

**Dan Hardway** Absolutely.

**Speaker 5** You know what Eddie told me about her, don't you?

**Dan Hardway** No. I don't.

**Speaker 5** She's a lying, conniving bitch. She should be in jail.

**Dan Hardway** Hey, she was staff D. What do you expect?

**Speaker 5** The other question I had, what happened to the appendix to the Mexico City report "Was Oswald an Agent of the CIA?"

**Dan Hardway** That's a misunderstanding that I cleared up with Lisa. I read that in something Lisa wrote, and that is a misunderstanding. The Lopez report is actually a draft of a portion of the final report of the committee. That was what that was written for. That was not our report on our activities. That was a draft that was supposed to be included in the final report. The reference to the section on Oswald being an agent or an asset was a reference to another section of the final report, not another section of the Lopez report. We wrote a portion of that section, but that was a section that the whole team was contributing to, and if I remember correctly Mickey Goldsmith was supposed to be coordinating and drafting, and whatever happened to it I don't know. I've never seen the section that I wrote as my contribution to that either. Yes.

**Speaker 6** Just a real quick question. Was the Joannides, was he a retired CIA employee who was brought back as a contractor to stonewall you?

**Dan Hardway** Yes. He was part of the Greek mafia. He was part of [Caramasini's 00:57:25] crowd.

**Speaker 7** That's a common practice.

**Speaker 8** Can you summarize why you think Bill Harvey may have been involved and whether there was a relationship between Bill and James Angleton?

**Dan Hardway** Obviously there's a relationship between Bill and James Angleton. Bill was CIA director before Jim Angleton was. That's the part I had to cut out because of time. When we pressed Bob to do investigation of conspirators, Bob would always tell us, "We can't put all of our eggs in one basket. There's no need to investigate conspirators if we can't prove a conspiracy." We, of course being young and wet behind the ears, disagreed with that, and wanted him to anyway which was how I got him to agree to let me do what I did get done.

**Dan Hardway** I still remember. It's a very vivid memory that I have the day that the acoustics evidence came in, and me and Bob standing outside in the hallway outside team five's office, and Bob looking at me and going, "My God, we've proven a conspiracy and we've not investigated the conspirators." I looked at Bob and I said, "You shouldn't have put all your eggs in one basket." I need to do a disclosure here probably. Bob Blakey and I, or I consider him and as well as Gaeton Fonzi to be two of my closest life personal friends. Bob has been a mentor to me my whole life, my whole career, and I am not one of those people who think Bob Blakey sold out, and I have an immense amount of respect for him.

**Dan Hardway** For him to actually come out and say, "I was wrong," and to do what he's done in the last 10 years since Jeff Morley made his discovery is absolutely remarkable to me, and he's a man of unquestionable integrity and of high honor in my view. I looked at him and I said, "Bob, I can write you a memo, a mode of means, an opportunity analysis memo on an operational analysis basis rather than a probable cause or a proof beyond a reasonable doubt analysis on who killed Kennedy." He said, "Go do it." I went into the CIA safe room. I wrote that memorandum on yellow paper with purple borders stamped "top secret," sequentially numbered so that the CIA could keep track of every piece of paper in there and that I couldn't sneak anything out.

**Dan Hardway** It was put in the files. I went and told Bob that it was done. I went into the room with Bob and sat there with him as he read it in the CIA safe room. Even Bob was not allowed to take anything out of the room. Bob read it. We discussed it. He put it back in the files, and as far as I know no one outside of the agency has ever seen that memo since, and according to the Assassination Records Review Board that memo does not exist, and there is no record of it ever having existed.

**Speaker 9** One last question.

**Dan Hardway** Yes.

**Speaker 10** Can I say first of all I think you guys did one hell of a job, I mean you personally.

**Dan Hardway** Thank you.

**Speaker 10** [inaudible 01:00:31] when I look at technical stuff, [Betsy Wharf 01:00:33], I think did a hell of a job too.

**Dan Hardway** Yes. She did.

**Speaker 10** Incredible job. I got here a little bit late. Did you say that you were with Gaeton for the Mitch Werbell interview?

**Dan Hardway** No. I didn't get to meet Mitch. I wanted to, but I didn't.

**Speaker 10** Because you know there's a four and a half hour, or three free tapes supposedly at The National Archives, four and a half hours with Mitch Werbell with Gaeton, but every single copy is missing. Every single copy.

**Dan Hardway** Golly gee. I'm shocked. Shocked, I tell you. Shocked.

**Speaker 10** There's no transcript except notes. Except notes.

**Dan Hardway** I'm surprised the notes are there. The thing is is you'll see it in the Lopez report. The footnotes are to our notes. I only discovered about a month and a half ago why I could not find any of the notes in any of the released documents. They were all destroyed. That's something that I haven't talked to Bob about yet that Bob is going to answer for.

**Speaker 11** Thank you.

**Audience** Nice to meet you.

**Audience** Likewise.

**Audience** I'm so happy [inaudible 01:01:45].
