**Leonard Brown** This is Leonard Brown. Like the murders of the three civil rights workers in Mississippi and those of Medgar Evers and Mrs. Violet Liuzzo, the murder of John F. Kennedy in Dallas Texas was, and is, in the legal sense, crime without punishment. Thus it seems, in terms of the crime itself, to represent the prototypical expression of a violent society. But in its aftermath, its implications range far beyond such a society's conventional process of punishing violence with yet more violence.

**Leonard Brown** This murder permanently marred what we have called the "American Dream," staining ambition and high aspiration with a tragic serum of futility. "Grow up," it seemed to say, "and be President, son, and be killed by your people." This murder said other things to other men. Attorney Mark Lane, for one, and Jim Garrison, District Attorney in New Orleans, for another. To these two lawyers, the formality was broken, interrupted in the freeze-frame moment of the crime itself. Like many Americans, they were troubled by the simplicity of the Warren Commission Report, which reduced the whole equation to "One man, one moment, one madness."

**Leonard Brown** Here, in a speech before the Southern California Broadcasters Award Dinner, is Jim Garrison, whose investigations into the murder of President John F. Kennedy have compelled a closer scrutiny of the abrupt and savage end of the New Frontier era in American politics.

**Jim Garrison** Ladies and gentlemen, I'm very honored to be invited here, particularly after reading some of the things that I've read about me in the Press. I think it's very gracious of the radio and television press in Southern California to invite me to eat in the same room with them. I'm glad to see that my friends from NBC are here too, because ... NBC as you know has such a burning interest in the right of the people to know.

**Jim Garrison** Art mentioned that I had a message, and curiously enough, in the sense he touched on the message when he mentioned the magazine article he had in his hand. He showed it to me a few minutes ago, and it caused me to make some notes, because essentially, what my message is is simply that the government does not have the right to lie. If a government has a right to lie, it has a right to murder, and I can assure you, any government which is able to get away with a lie, will get away with murder.

**Jim Garrison** The name of the situation you have when a government is allowed to lie with equanimity is fascism. That's all it is, fascism. When you've reach the point, as we seem to have reached, where you can have magazine articles with men writing articles such as "the government has the right to lie," or "I'm glad the CIA is immoral," what you've reached is a point of acceptability in certain areas of fascism, and I think it's a time to become concerned. That's what the Kennedy assassination is all about. The fraudulent concealment of what really happened, that's what it is all about too. The fact that some degree of fascism has arrived in our country.

**Jim Garrison** You'll recall that George Santayana said that "those who do not learn from history are condemned to relive it." If we have not learned from our experiences before and during the Second World War what fascism is, then we in time ourselves will be condemned to relive the very history that they did. We are headed in that direction.

**Jim Garrison** Fascism, just to summarize it briefly, is the kind of government you have when the government, although using populist phrases like [foreign language 00:04:17], bread and work, is really alienated from the people. Fascism is what you have when violence such as the assassination of a President, becomes acceptable. And fascism is what you have when a fraud perpetrated by the government, and the "big lie," becomes acceptable, because the government is so powerful that individuals, and even many publications, are afraid to oppose it. Fascism is what you have when there is a question about what happens to the dissenter. The most important thing we have in our way of life, in our form of government, is the fact that the dissenter is usually able to survive, even when he criticized the most powerful men in government.

**Jim Garrison** But we've reached the point in recent years, perhaps because of the development of the industrial warfare machine that Eisenhower warned about, where major magazines and major publications hesitate to criticize the government, and before they take a position, test the wind to see from which way it's blowing. Truth becomes secondary. Justice becomes secondary. Truth is whatever the government wants to be released, and justice is whatever the government wants to happen. We have reached that point, and I want to try and give you a few examples to show you.

**Jim Garrison** Now, what I'm going to say tonight, and I'm going to make it short because I know that you have a lot of awards, will probably not be liked be everybody here. But if I what I said was liked by everybody here, then I wouldn't be doing it right. I want to say things to you that are true, and when something is said that is true, the one thing that's predictable is that it will not be liked by everybody. It will be necessary for me to pick a few bones with the Great Society. These will be domestic bones, so it won't involve the war in Vietnam, or the use of napalm on other human beings, but it will involve the question of whether or not the government has a right to lie, because our government has been lying to the people of this country now for nearly four years. You are being fooled. Every man and woman in this country is being fooled, and tonight, I'm going to tell you who is responsible.

**Jim Garrison** Now back in the early 30s, when fascism arrived on the scene in Germany, oddly enough, it arrived in a way that closely parallels the arrival here in November of 1963. The Reichstag fire, if you'll remember, was clearly set by the Nazis, but a young communist was seized and executed for it. As a result of this, everyone was satisfied it had been looked into and the Nazis in turn were able to profit in terms of power from it. This, of course, is the essential technique of fascism, to satisfy the people and cause them to think that they live in the best of all possible worlds. It's not just a fascist technique, it's a totalitarian technique, which the Soviet government perfected many years ago.

**Jim Garrison** For example, during the years when Stalin was liquidating his enemies and entrenching his power, there was no mention of it in Pravda, no mention of it in the other Russian journals, except on occasion to point out what monsters these individuals were, and more often than not, they disappeared without any sign of their disappearance. The best book that I know of, for those of you who would like to see what happens to a country when the management begins to think it has a right to lie, and when the management really thinks it's all right for a powerful government agency to be proud of its immorality, is George Orwell's "1984," and I commend it to you. When it was written in 1949, it was really written about Russia. But if you read it now, you'll find that you're reading about Russia and our own government. This should not be so, but that's the way it is, because we have reached a point where many people in our government think they have the right to lie.

**Jim Garrison** As a matter of fact, no government has ever existed, since man arrived on earth, that was more important than the truth. If our government has reached a point where the survival of the government is more important than the truth, then the best thing that could happen would to be for it to fall and we can start building a new government tomorrow morning, out of logs. We can always build a government, but life is not worth living in a fascist or totalitarian government unless you fight it. And if the government is lying, then you have to fight it.

**Jim Garrison** Now our government is lying, and I want to give you a few examples. What the United States Government did in the Kennedy assassination, and it was a well-planned assassination, involving a number of individuals-

**Speaker 3** Never.

**Jim Garrison** ... as you will learn I assure you, what the government did was to practice two essential actions to conceal the truth of the assassination. One was concealment of evidence, and the other was destruction of evidence. Very briefly, I want to give you some examples of the technique they used, in specific terms. Of course, I'm not going to speak about Mr. Shaw's case, I haven't spoken about Mr. Shaw's case since the day we charged him, in spite of what you may have read. On the other hand, I think you would appreciate some statistics, so if you'll bear with me, I'm going to give you some, and I'm going to show you what your government has done, and I'm going to tell you why.

**Jim Garrison** Now, examples of the destruction of evidence begin with the burning of the autopsy notes by Commander Humes. Of course one of the most important questions of the entire assassination was the question of the direction of the bullets. As everybody who has looked into the assassination knows, I think without any exception, the fatal shots were fired from the front of the President. In order to keep this secret from the people of the United States, the notes of Dr. Humes, of the autopsy, were burned by Dr. Humes, and he was subsequently promoted.

**Jim Garrison** Another case of spontaneous combustion occurred when a CIA memo, requested by the Warren Commission, was accidentally burned while being Thermo faxed. This happened the day after the assassination in Washington. The federal agent who interview Oswald in New Orleans, a gentleman named Quigley, burned his notes after the interview, and yet he belongs to an agency whose policy it is never to burn notes. The major landmarks in the grassy knoll area where the assassination occurred have been changed, signs have been moved, to make it harder for measurements to be made.

**Jim Garrison** Another interesting example of what the government has done is to turn your attention away from the direction where the assassins came from to cause you to look into another spectrum, another area. I have to explain to you now, before I go into this, so that you will understand, because I'm about to talk about political ideology. You don't know me, so I have to tell you that I certainly don't claim any special merit in it, but my political position is pretty much in the center of the road. We need conservatives, obviously, for stability, and of course we need liberals too, because they give us progress.

**Jim Garrison** But one of the problems in this particular case, is that everybody has tried to impose their own political ideology on the assassination. For example, friends of mine, who are conservatives, can't conceive of anybody but an extreme liberal killing the President. Friends of mine who are liberal cannot conceive of anything but an extreme conservative. But of course, neither extreme has a monopoly on virtue, and by the same token, neither extreme has a monopoly on murder. It just happens to be a fact that in this case, the President was murdered by militant members of the right wing.

**Jim Garrison** The main function of the Warren Commission, and the reason it was appointed, the main function of the Warren Commission, was to conceal the fact that militant, right-wing individuals had killed the President of the United States, and also to conceal the fact that individuals connected with the Central Intelligence Agency were involved. Now, with this in mind, you can better appreciate that among the items of evidence destroyed or changed, which is a form of destruction, is in Oswald's notebook. If you were to open Lee Oswald's notebook, one of the first names and phone numbers you'd see is General Edwin Walker's name. Has Walker there, and has his phone number. Now when the United States government got finished retyping that name into a memo, Walker had become Volke. V-O-L-K-E. Now I'm just giving that as an example to show you how systematically, everything that even touched the right wing, they either eliminated or concealed. It doesn't mean that General Walker is necessarily involved, but the point is, the United States Government was well aware of where the assassins were located on the political spectrum, and without exception, every case where the trail led to the right, the evidence has been destroyed by the government, or concealed. You can see it in 72 years, or 71 years, but you've got to wait.

**Jim Garrison** Now here's an example of the kind of evidence that they concealed: There is a picture in Commission Exhibit 5. There's a Commission picture which shows a car parked at General Walker's house. Now, when this picture was picked up at Mrs. Paine's, presumably in the hands of Oswald, although there are real questions about that, the license number on the car was clear. There's no question about that. But by the time they printed the picture in the Commission exhibits, a large hole had been punched through the license number. So if you want to go to your library and look up Commission Exhibit number 5, you'll see a car parked at General Walker's house in which the trunk appears to have exploded, because someone punched a hole in it. But this is just part of the systematic pattern again and again.

**Jim Garrison** For example, one of the books which you cannot see, you cannot look at, is called "Nazis and Fascists of Today," published in Paris. The French version is available to you, except the government lost all those copies. They just don't have it. The English version you cannot see for many years. They just don't want you to see it. Again, another form of destruction which has occurred, and I can't say that the government has done this, all I can say is that someone has, is key witnesses, the fact that key witnesses are being destroyed. Nancy Mooney was killed because she knew who was visiting Jack Ruby at his office in the Carousel Club. Hank Killam was killed too, because he knew of the connection between Jack Ruby and Lee Oswald. Incidentally, I might add, a connection which was so easy to establish that no one can take any credit for it. There simply is no question about the fact that there was a very close relationship between Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby for well over a year.

**Jim Garrison** Instances of concealment of evidence by the United States Government, again, another example of how your government thinks that it has a right to lie to you. The autopsy photos, now concealed for nearly four years: 22 color pictures, 18 black and white, 11 x-rays, all concealed. Now remember, the main question, the burning question, was from how many directions was the President shot? And where was he hit? And where did the fatal shot come from? And which shot was the fatal shot? Yet even today, you cannot see the autopsy photographs. And the reason you cannot see them is because they would show that the President was shot from the front, as well as the back. And they would show that the fatal shot came from the front.

**Jim Garrison** Now the witnesses in the grassy knoll area, virtually every one of them heard the shots coming from the grassy knoll vicinity. At least one has seen one of the individuals behind the stone wall. These people were not called by the Warren Commission. They were not called by the Warren Commission because they would have testified about the shots coming from the grassy knoll area, and you're not supposed to know that. Nor were you told no examination was made of the Mannlicher–Carcano which Oswald supposedly fired but never did. No examination was made to determine whether it was fired. They couldn't make an examination of it because of the possibility it may not have been fired. And the reason this position was taken was because of their awareness that he was not involved in the shooting.

**Jim Garrison** Oswald's fingerprints were not on the rifle, although the inference was given that they were. Oswald's fingerprints were not on the Smith and Wesson .38 that killed Tippit, although the inference has been created that they were. Remember, supposedly Oswald, who did not kill Tippit, supposedly he ran, unloading cartridges as he ran and putting in new bullets, then in the Texas Theater, he stood up and yelled "This is it!" and supposedly there was a big struggle and he tried to shoot an officer and they got the gun from him. Well when that gun was examined, there was not a fingerprint on it. It had been wiped clean. The reason it had been wiped clean is Oswald never held it in his hands. Another gratuitous contribution to the scenario by the Dallas police force.

**Jim Garrison** You haven't been told, unless you've made a hobby as some people have of looking deeply into it, that the nitrate test indicated that Lee Oswald had not fired a rifle that day. There's no question about this. This became so clear that the Warren Commission was forced to take this standard test, which is accepted all over the world, and try to develop the new position that there was a question about it.

**Jim Garrison** The allegation of PFC Eugene Dinkin, perhaps my favorite concealed file. It bothered me for some time until we heard from an individual who was in PFC Eugene Dinkin's outfit in Germany. The allegations of PFC Dinkin is one of the files that you cannot see for many years, and the reason you cannot see it is that in late 1962 and early 1963, PFC Eugene Dinkin was making the incredible allegation that he was confident that President Kennedy would be assassinated by members of the militant right wing. Now for some reason, someone in the government is sensitive about that and you cannot see it.

**Jim Garrison** Again, you find that in the permanent Carousel cards which Jack Ruby had and was about to have laminated, which contained some of his closer friends, and in his notes, which were in his car, one of the addresses he had behind the name Tom Hill was the home address of Robert Welch of the John Birch Society. Now, let me make this point: That doesn't mean that the John Birch Society is involved, because they're not. There's no group like that involved. The point is since it does indicate a certain degree of right-wing orientation on Jack Ruby's part, no mention is made to you that that address behind Tom Hill's name is the home address in Massachusetts of Robert Welch.

**Jim Garrison** Similarly, when the phone calls from Earl Ruby up in Detroit are indicated, they do not tell you how many times Earl Ruby called the James Welch Candy Company in Massachusetts. Suddenly they become very casual about how many calls are made because again, there's an inference of militant right-wing orientation, and they want to conceal this from you.

**Jim Garrison** Again, you have concealed the file entitled "Lee Harvey Oswald's access to information about the U-2." The reason you can't see that for many years is because you will then realize that Lee Oswald was working for the United States Government as a CIA employee, and they don't want you to know that.

**Jim Garrison** Again, the attorneys for the Warren Commission knew, when they saw "544 Camp" printed on the pamphlets which Oswald, supposedly a communist, was giving out, when they saw "544 Camp," they knew immediately who was at 544 Camp. This building housed the most conservative, reactionary, the strongest anti-communist in the city of New Orleans, Guy Banister, in whose office Sergio Arcacha and David Ferrie, who didn't know Oswald very well, from whose office they operated. But they treated that, en person, as if it had no significance at all. Because again, they did not want you to know that President Kennedy was killed as a result of a militant right-wing plot.

**Jim Garrison** Now again, you are being fooled. Oswald did not fire a gun, he did not shoot anybody and the United States Government has to know it. There cannot possibly be any question in their minds. If there remains anyone in this audience who thinks that the members of the Warren Commission have any innocence left in this regard, let me just call to your attention that long before they ceased functioning on the Warren Commission, long before that, the burning question was, from how many directions did the shots come, and where was the President hit? Nevertheless, not a single member of the seven, not one member of the Warren Commission looked at the photographs of the autopsy or looked at the x-rayed pictures because they knew what they would see. They knew the President had been shot from the front and they did not want to lose their innocence. There's no other possible explanation for that.

**Jim Garrison** Now despite the concealment and the destruction of evidence, there are examples of how the Warren Commission conclusion is fraudulent within the Warren Commission itself. I'm just going to give you a few examples here, very briefly, but if you want to note them down with a pencil, you can go look at the Warren Commission exhibits in your library. I think after you look at them, you'll realize that the conclusion is untrue.

**Jim Garrison** For example, if you look at Commission Exhibit 392, you'll see that Dr. McClelland has indicated the cause of death as a gunshot wound to the temple. Commission Exhibit 392. By the time they realized it was out, apparently it was too late, so they colored the paper very dark so it's a little hard for you to read. But if you look close, you'll see it's a gunshot wound to the temple. Of course, unless they've changed it in the meanwhile, the Book Depository used to be behind where the President was.

**Jim Garrison** Again, the Warren Commission indicated to you and to the American people that Oswald must have learned Russian on his bunk at night and studying, because he was such a Marxist, such a communist, he wanted to get over to Russia. Yet a slip of the tongue occurred during the testimony of Commander Folsom. If you look at the Folsom testimony in the testimony section, you'll find Commander Folsom referring to Oswald's grade in an Armed Forces Russian examination. PRT-21. Practical Russian Test 21, United States Army Examination. He was taught Russian by the United States Government. The same government which employed him, the same government which ultimately framed him because this government believes that it's all right to tell lies.

**Jim Garrison** You recall that Oswald is supposed to have been a Russian defector. Yet one of his first jobs on his return from Russia was at Jagger, Stover, Childs, which is a company which did high-level, high-security work for the United States Government, including photography and a special kind of map work. Again, in the summer of '63 in New Orleans, when this communist defector sought a passport, he got one in 24 hours. Now the other individuals who applied on that day did not get them in 24 hours, but Oswald got his, a passport to go to Europe, Spain, many other places, in 24 hours. As most of you know this is not possible, not to even get passport, if you are truly a defector.

**Jim Garrison** Now another example of the Lee Oswald-Jack Ruby relationship. There are many witnesses available and it's no problem for any prosecutor who's concerned about bringing out the truth to develop eyewitnesses who saw Ruby and Oswald together. Not merely in Dallas, but in many other towns. That just was not that hard. But if you want to see an example in the Warren Commission itself, or a few examples, I'll give you some places to look.

**Jim Garrison** First of all, I think many of you are already familiar with the fact that Jack Ruby had a business relationship with Bertha Cheek and that Lee Oswald was living in the house owned by Bertha Cheek's sister, Earlene Roberts, at 1026 North Beckley. This didn't arouse the Commission's interest at all. Of course, it didn't arouse the Commission's interest even when eyewitnesses saw them together at the Carousel Club, such as, for example, the date of November the 10th. If you look at Lee Oswald's address book, you will see the number FR-5 5591. This is the phone number of Kenneth Cody, FR 5-5591. Who is Kenneth Cody? He is the uncle of Joe Cody, on the police force, who, in his testimony before the Warren Commission, admitted that he had been a very close friend of Jack Ruby's for many years. For many years.

**Jim Garrison** Again, if you look at Oswald's address book, you will see PE 8-1951. You will see it several times in Volume 16, in Oswald's address book. PE 8-1951. On June the 10th and June the 11 of 1963, Jack Ruby called that number twice. It's a number in Fort Worth. When Jack Ruby called that number he was in New Orleans, and Oswald was in New Orleans. Now, there are not a great many people in this room, but I doubt if there's anybody in this room that has in their address book any numbers which I have in mine, and yet this was not a matter of curiosity to the Commission at all. The reason it was not a curiosity I'm sure, is that they were very well aware, very well aware of the fact that there was indeed a close relationship between Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby. It just isn't even close. They had to know it. So when they pretended that Ruby did not know Oswald, and pretended that he killed him because he did not want Jackie Kennedy to come down and testify in court, your government was lying to you again, just as they lie to you now.

**Jim Garrison** When Ramsey Clarke announces that we have charged an innocent man, surely, a statement which has never been made in history by an Attorney General of the United States in charge of the very division which is supposed to be concerned about the government attempting to torpedo and advance the State's case, when he does that, and when the Chief Justice of the United States announces from Tokyo that he's seen nothing new in our case, I don't know what he was doing in Tokyo, presumably inspecting the 7th Fleet, but whatever he was doing down there, he has to know that he will never know what our case is about until we come in court, and he was performing a function. For whom was he performing a function? For whom was Ramsey Clark performing? Who is responsible for the continued obstruction to the first honest investigation that this country has had into the assassination?

**Jim Garrison** Harry Truman had a sign on his desk when he was President, which says "The buck stops here." Who appointed the Warren Commission? Who was aware that there was a CIA problem and caused the seven-man commission to be composed of the former head of the CIA, Allen Dulles; the best friend the CIA has in the Senate, Senator Richard Russell; the best friend that the CIA has in the House, Congressman Gerald Ford; and the former head of the OSS, out of which the CIA grew, John J. McCloy? The Commission weighted in advance by defenders of the CIA. Who appointed Ramsey Clark? Who has done his best to torpedo the investigation of the case? Who controls the CIA? Who controls the FBI? Who controls the archives where this evidence is locked up for so long that it is unlikely that there is anybody in this room that will be alive when it is released? This is really your property, and the property of the people in this country. Who has the arrogance and the brass to prevent the people in this country from seeing that evidence? Who indeed? The one man who has profited most from the assassination, your friendly President, Lyndon Johnson.

**Jim Garrison** Don't be fooled by the humility and the picking up of faggots, don't be fooled by that. The question is, when do we get to see the evidence about the murder of John Kennedy? That's the question, and he's the man who's responsible for hiding it. I've leaned over backwards for months now while our phones have been monitored, while the government has done everything it could to torpedo with the investigation, because they know we stumbled on it, and I claim no virtue, we are not great investigators. It was largely luck. We stumbled on it. But we did stumble on it, and we do know what happened, and it won't even be close. There won't be any acquittals, if we can get these people to trial. If we can get them to trial. If we can prevent the U.S. Government from blowing up our case, or finding a way to remove me from office. If we get them to trial, you will learn what happened to John Kennedy, and who killed him. You will then learn that you've been living under a government now for four years which has concealed evidence and destroyed evidence, and lied to you again, again, and again.

**Jim Garrison** Now, I don't say that President Johnson is involved in the assassination. I have no reason to know that he is ... but I do think this: I do think that the fact that he has profited from the assassination more than any other man makes it imperative that he see that the evidence is released, so that we can know that he's not involved, rather than assume it. Of course I assume that the President of the United States is not involved, but wouldn't it be nice to know it? Wouldn't it be nice to know the people who backed him for years in Texas are not involved? Of course, we'll assume it. But wouldn't it be nice to know that?

**Jim Garrison** Is this a Great Society which allows innocence to be butchered ... as Oswald was, with no concern, no interest, which allows the guilty, the murderers to walk the streets, knowing without any question who they are, knowing what happened, is this a Great Society? Is it a Great Society which causes blackouts in news centers like New York, when there's a development in the case? Which pressures governors so that the District Attorney of New Orleans, who is prosecuting the case, tries to get a man back from Ohio or Texas or Missouri or Iowa, so that he can never get them back, when prior to that point extraditions were automatic? Is this a Great Society which monitors your phone if it has the slightest bit of curiosity about you?

**Jim Garrison** This is not a Great Society, this is a dangerous society. A society which, despite the lip service to populism and the lip service to good things and material things and economic things, is so morally threadbare that the futures of your children are in danger. It raises a question as to whether the Constitution itself might not accidentally have been burned to a crisp by now.

**Jim Garrison** So now, we come to you of the Press who are here tonight because ... the real need is for your help. To be blunt about it, the Press of America has been apathetic. The Press has been consumed with inertia since the assassination. The questions the Press asks about me and raises about me, are a very healthy thing. If I can't survive it, then I'm in the wrong business. I don't care what questions they raise about the case, because I know we can win our cases. That's the way it should be, and if the Press has any doubts about me, if they think I'm politically ambitious, if they really think that I would charge somebody for some kind of person gain, then they should raise the question. That's fine. Because I'll survive it, and I'll answer the questions.

**Jim Garrison** But, why don't they ask these questions that demand to be asked of the President of the United States? Have we reached a point where the President is so powerful, that the Press is afraid to ask him, "President Johnson, why cannot we see these hidden files?" Are they so afraid of the golden eagle that is the Presidential Emblem, so afraid of the power now massed in Washington, that we have become a fascist country? It's really up to you from now on. Because I've already had an example, and so have you, of what can happen after the convictions. We obtained a major conviction already, conviction of Dean Andrews, for perjury in connection with this case. Most of the country doesn't even know the details yet. It just didn't get out. And it might well be the same when other convictions occur. If America ever needed a Press, it needs a Press today.

**Jim Garrison** Let me tell you something about that. The most important thing that this country has ever given the world, and the thing for which we will be remembered, is the Bill of Rights. We took a big step forward from all the rest of history, in connection with the concern of government for the rights of individuals. But, these rights don't mean anything unless the Press is concerned.

**Jim Garrison** What rights, for example, did Lee Oswald have in Dallas? He had no rights. He saw no lawyer, he had no rights at all. He was framed by people in law enforcement. The U.S. Government helped. He had no rights at all. But if the Press had been concerned enough in Dallas, they would not have dared to do this, and if the Press in this country can just get concerned about what the present administration is doing about the lie that is being perpetrated, about the fact that the men who killed Jack Kennedy are still loose and untouched by justice, then the President cannot continue to get away with turning his back on the problem. That's what he's doing, and he must not be allowed to do it. Because this country does not belong to him, it belongs to you and 200 million men and women and children.

**Jim Garrison** So let me just say this: That if you ever wished for an opportunity to do something for your profession and do something for your country, then you have such an opportunity as no one has had since being a reporter became a profession. If you can just get interested. If you can only get interested. Because your country needs you now, as it never has before. Thank you.

**Leonard Brown** Following Mr. Garrison's speech, there was a question and answer period. Most of those attending the banquet were newsmen, and hence this resembled an informal press conference. The first question to Mr. Garrison was: "Do you believe that anyone within the framework of the United States Government helped plot the assassination, why did the government hide evidence, and third, who really killed Jack Kennedy?"

**Jim Garrison** First of all, employees, a limited number I should say, employees of the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States Government are involved in the assassination. A number of them have been identified. Secondly, in my judgment, the reason that the United States Government, meaning the present administration, Lyndon Johnson's administration, is obstructing any investigation, any further investigation, the reason they concealed the true facts are, to be blunt about it, in order to protect the individuals involved with the assassination of John Kennedy. As to the third question, that involves names, and I cannot possibly go into that at this time.

**Speaker 4** Ladies and gentlemen, let me add that Mr. Garrison wanted to make mention that he cannot answer any questions regarding Clay Shaw's trial, which should be coming up sometime next year.

**Leonard Brown** The next question was: "Why the tacit approval of the Kennedy family of the Warren Commission Report?"

**Speaker 4** Yes sir.

**Jim Garrison** I don't want to be unfair to Senator Kennedy and I think if I tried to speculate without having the facts I would be unfair. For example, the comments which I made about the President were comments made as the result of specific facts that we have after months of forbearance. On the other hand, I don't know enough about the Kennedys' reasons to guess. I'm curious too. I don't understand it, but I don't know.

**Leonard Brown** Next, Garrison was asked: "How did you stumble onto the story?"

**Jim Garrison** I didn't mean it in that way. What I meant was we stumbled onto the case itself. If we had not ... got curious about the odd trip that David Ferrie made right into a thunderstorm all night to go ice skating in Houston, and the fact that he did not go ice skating there, if we had not seen that, and continued to be curious about it, we would not have found our way into the whole thing, because they had cutoffs and insulation of every possible kind. We just happened to find ourselves in the intermediate area right below the level of the sponsors, or financiers, and right above the level of what you might call the operating level, the people who pulled the trigger. We stumbled into it by luck. That's what I meant, not as a result of skill, but because we didn't let go and we kept on digging, we had other luck later on and came across the other individuals.

**Jim Garrison** Now the other part, if you mean with regard to the fact that I now bring up for the first time the fact that is very plain to us that the President of the United States bears the responsibility, the total responsibility, for the obstruction and concealment of the development of the truth in this matter, is something that we have known for months. But I wanted to lean over backwards because it's so easy to say it and I'm sure there will be replies that this is a rash statement. But there's no question about it, it's the Executive Order which comes from the President that postponed your seeing the evidence for 75 years. But we wanted to lean over backwards, and we have. We've tried to get cooperation. It's become hopeless. I don't want to criticize Ramsey Clark, I think he's a harmless sort of little fellow who has no idea what's happening. Well, his father was on the Supreme Court so he's head of the Justice Department. But the responsibility is in the President's lap, and the time has come to bring it out, but we have known that for some months.

**Leonard Brown** Another question: "Mr. Garrison, you made the statement that the main function of the Warren Commission was to conceal the right-wing militants who killed the President. The Warren Commission was appointed by President Johnson and composed of people such as Chief Justice Warren whom certain right-wing groups have attacked and asked for his removal. Is it your charge that the President appointed him, among others, in order to conceal the facts of the assassination?"

**Jim Garrison** That's a very good question, but I think the function of appointing the Chief Justice was to obtain what you might call political compromise. Because as a result -- I think it was an ingenious appointment -- as a result, the Warren Commission's conclusions had and now have strong backing from the liberal element of the country. At the same time, there's a certain amount of support from the conservative element because of the presence of Congressman Gerald Ford on the Commission. I think that was probably a major reason for it.

**Jim Garrison** Now I don't know, because I cannot go into the man's mind, that when he appointed the Commission the week after the assassination, that this was his precise concern at the time. I think the makeup of the Commission makes it quite evident that there was at that time a concern about the involvement of individuals connected with the CIA and it might well be that during the course of the inquiry, they then became protective of the status quo. The Dallas Police scenario, somewhere along that time, was adopted as the official truth. But I think the essential reason for the appointment of Chief Justice Warren was to obtain the support of liberals for the Warren Commission.

**Leonard Brown** Next Garrison was asked: "Why would Chief Justice Warren, who has never been identified as a right winger, conceal a right-wing plot?"

**Jim Garrison** I have no idea. You're gonna have to ask Chief Justice Warren.

**Leonard Brown** Another question: "If you criticize the government for concealing evidence, may we ask why you, as a member of the government, will not reveal to us the demonstrable proof that you have as to who killed President Kennedy?" Here's Garrison's answer.

**Jim Garrison** As a prosecutor, I am not allowed to reveal to you my evidence until the case comes to trial. If I reveal my evidence to you, in order to make you happy, and I'd love to do it, I won't be able to convict the defendant.

**Leonard Brown** **This line of questioning continues. "Does that mean you are charging the defendant with the murder of the President?" Garrison** **Jim Garrison** The defendant has already been charged with conspiracy to murder the President, yes. It's written down in black and white.

**Leonard Brown** Question: "Was there CIA money that went into the full page ad in that Dallas paper on the day preceding the assassination?"

**Jim Garrison** The ad was in the paper on the day of the assassination as I recall, but no, I don't think it was CIA money for that particular ad. I don't think for that particular ad.

**Leonard Brown** Another question: "What did the President do to incur the wrath of the right wing?"

**Jim Garrison** Well, suppose I just give you three things off the top of my head. What did Franklin D. Roosevelt do to incur the wrath of the right wing? Don't you realize that the militant, the extreme right wing, felt that they had another Franklin D. Roosevelt from their point of view? In my judgment, I have to say this ahead of time so you won't misunderstand, I happen to think that John Kennedy was a good President, and I feel rather strongly about that. But from their point of view, here were their concerns: First of all, it was obvious that he was bringing to an end the Cuban adventure. Bringing it to an end. Certain steps had been taken to a direct rapprochement, a détente with Fidel Castro. It was plain that an understanding was being worked out whereby there would be no more raids, no more plans to take over Cuba.

**Jim Garrison** Again in the same direction, it was plain that the President was bringing an end to the Cold War, was becoming concerned about the billions of dollars being spent for the Cold War, was thinking about the possibility of trying to understand Russia better. I don't mean that he was going to dismantle our defenses, but he was reaching for an understanding and it's quite apparent too that he did not intend to expand the war in Vietnam. As far as Texans are concerned, he left no doubt about the fact that he was headed directly for the 27 and a half percent deduction, the 27 and a half percent deduction is something very dear to some people in Texas. Now that's just a few for openers.

**Leonard Brown** **Here a note might be in order. 27 and a half percent is the oil depletion allowance. Another question: "Do you still feel that David Ferrie possibly did not die of natural causes and if so, why? And by what method do you think Jack Ruby met his end?" Here is Mr. Garrison's answer** **Jim Garrison** I don't know about Jack Ruby because I don't have enough data about his death to know, and I don't want to speculate. The way that Dave Ferrie appears to have killed himself appears to be an overdose of proloid, P-R-O-L-O-I-D, which is really nothing but the old-fashioned thyroid pill. If you're hypothyroid and you have low thyroid, if you have a thyroid deficiency, then taking proloid doesn't hurt you at all. It beefs up your metabolism. On the other hand, Ferrie had a serious high blood pressure problem and, if you have high blood pressure of a serious nature, and you take an overdose of proloid, it's predictable that you will have a brain aneurism, which is what Ferrie had. It leaves no evidence for the coroner to find in the usual examination except a high iodine content in the blood. No check was made of the blood content for iodine and a nearly empty bottle of proloid was found among the bottles of this man with extremely high blood pressure. This is a layman's opinion, I've talked to pathologists about it, but we don't have a medical conclusion yet. But this does appear to be the likely way in which he committed suicide.

**Leonard Brown** That was New Orleans District Attorney James Garrison speaking to the Award Dinner of the Southern California Broadcasters Association at the Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles. The speech was recorded by Paul and Shirley Eberle of the Los Angeles Free Press, who have graciously allowed us to broadcast these tapes here.

**Leonard Brown** Production for Pacifica is by Leonard Brown. This has been Leonard Brown.
