**Rex Bradford** Hello. My talk is going to be a little bit different. I'm going to start with a kind of a history lesson that many hopefully will show some of the context of what we're talking about. It's not directly about the Kennedy assassination, although I'll be moving into that as well.

**Rex Bradford** For the old hands in the audience, I apologize if some of this is familiar ground. I would like to start by painting a picture of a time. Imagine this if you will, there's intense partisan ranker in Washington. A controversial war abroad recently wound down. And in the midst of all this, a steady drum beat of revelations about intelligence agency abuses. Wire tapping, spying on Americans, and even targeting of foreign adversaries abroad for assassination. Oh wait, I'm describing 2013.

**Rex Bradford** But the year I'm going to focus on is 1975. This picture actually is from a few years before, but it may give you a little bit of a flavor of the times. '75 is the year after President Nixon resigned over the Watergate cover up. Although his paranoid governing style, it earned him many enemies, not just liberal institutions and democratic leaders, but also on the other side.

**Rex Bradford** For example in 1971, Nixon discovered that he was being spied upon than no less than the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Moorer. A navy yeoman, and Charles Radford, had been stealing documents from Henry Kissinger, his Secretary of State. Anyway, Nixon's resignation in 1974 was followed by a heavily democratic so called reform Congress. Some of the names you may recognize. Henry Waxman, Tom Hartman, and Patrick Lehey were elected in that Congress. They immediately voted funding restrictions on the Vietnam War, which was already winding down, but wound down much more quickly.

**Rex Bradford** The new Congress was also determined to make government more open, and passed the Government and Sunshine Act towards that end. Nixon had been succeeded by former Warren Commissioner Gerald Ford, who along with his Chief of Staff, Donald Rumsfeld and his aid Dick Cheney, wasn't on quite at the same page as Congress. Ford was not in a position of strength at this time, though. For example, The Freedom of Information Act, which had been passed in 1966. But without the teeth to overcome agency stonewalling, would strengthen in '74 and Ford vetoed that, but was overridden by two thirds vote of Congress.

**Rex Bradford** This is the context in which revelations of abuses of not only the White House, but also U.S. Intelligence agencies. FBI, CIA, and others began to leak out of Washington into the nation's newspapers. Revelations that the U.S. Army had been spying upon anti-war demonstrators, was followed by a major article in the New York Times in December of '74 by Seymour Hurse, in which he revealed CIA spying operations on Americans, and break ins, and other activities on U.S. soil in violation of their charter.

**Rex Bradford** The Ford White House at this point immediately wanted to know what other skeletons were in CIA closet. Within days, CIA Director Colby had delivered a family jewels document to the Ford White House. Some of you may know that in 2007, this document was finally released to the public. Although much of it was old news at that point. And their redactions, the black outs, begin on the signature page.

**Rex Bradford** It included revelations of other abuses, including wire tapping of reporters, opening of mail, and assassination plots. Now, there've been rumors circulating from time to time about assassination plots against Fidel Castro, Cuba's leader. It turns out it was President Ford himself who let the cat out of the bag. He was at a White House lunch with New York Times editors, and was asking for their forbearance, and all these revelations. Because "It would blacken the reputation of every president since Truman if they wrote about them."

**Rex Bradford** When quizzed what he was talking about, he said, "Like assassination." And the New York Times editors didn't actually publish this comment, but it got leaked to Daniel Shore, who soon did.

**Rex Bradford** What happened next is that Ford pointed his Vie President, Nelson Rockefeller, and created a commission on CIA activities in the United States. But both houses of Congress also quickly followed suit with their own investigations. The Rockefeller commission did receive evidence of the CIA assassination plots, but didn't take that on as an issue. In general, they conducted pretty circumscribed probe. Former Warren Commission staff member David Bellen was their Executive Director.

**Rex Bradford** They did publish a report about CIA domestic spying, and mail opening. They actually took on two questions were the Kennedy assassination. One was whether now famous Watergate burglars E. Howard Hunt, and Frank Sturgeous were two of the three Daily Plaza tramps in disguise. They also took on the somewhat more serious question of JFK's rearward head snap as seen in this Bruter film, which had been recently shown for the first time on national television. Somebody may know that Dr. Sierra Weck testified before the Rockefeller Commission in that regard.

**Rex Bradford** But the limited focus Rockefeller Commission was quickly superseded by a body with a lengthy name, which came to be known as the Church Committee, after it's Chairman Idaho who Senator Frank Church. And they really opened it up. They took on a full review of U.S. Intelligence agencies' history and rational, as well as the accesses and abuses. The Senate Committee was much more aggressive than the Rockefeller Commission had been, although their style contrasted with the much more confrontational House of Representatives. I can only imagine what Dick Cheney thought of New York Congresswoman Bella [Abzog 00:06:36] taking on the National Security Agency.

**Rex Bradford** In the end, the Houses Committee report was actually suppressed by the house, and only printed in the Village Voice when Daniel Shore again leaked it. Bu the Church Committee went on to do a year and a half long investigation, published 14 thick volumes of reports, some of them quite thick. The bland titles here don't begin to cover the range of topics that they really took on. This included things like the FBI's Counter Intelligence Program, a domestic disruption called Co-Intel Pro. They are harassment of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., joint FBI and CIA mail opening programs. Warrantless electronic surveillance, and black bag jobs buy the FBI. A CIA domestic spying program called Chaos, covert operations such as coup plotting in Chile abroad, and other topics.

**Rex Bradford** In this talk, there's a lot to get into there, and we're not going to. I'm going to cover two of the reports in the investigations behind them here. The first is their uncovering and documenting of foreign assassination plotting by the CIA. The second is a limited review they conducted of some aspects of the Kennedy assassination. Before we get started, I want to say that I think what they did was very valuable work doing the detailed documentation of the plots to kill Castro and others. I have no doubt that if not for what the Church Committee did, the whole idea that the CIA plotted against these people would be one of these conspiracy theories you hear about with pros and cons, and reminiscent of some other matter that's before us week.

**Rex Bradford** It's also striking how much I think things have changed in America since 1975. Nowadays, the U.S. openly conducts drone strikes against foreign adversaries, who senior officials call "bad guys," and along with the collateral damage of family members, the associates who may or may not be themselves bad guys, and the occasional wedding party. In 1975 by contrast it as a national scandal. The very idea that the executive branch of the U.S. government would contemplate targeted killings abroad.

**Rex Bradford** Okay, so who are our targets here? The Church Committee right off the bat took on the CIA assassination plots as a priority, conducted over 100 interviews to try to piece together the story of executive action. And they focused on these five foreign leaders. This is Fidel Castro of Cuba, Patrice Lumumba of the Congo, Raphael Trujillo of the Dominican Republic, Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam, and Rene Schneider of Chile. In a footnote, the noted that actually had received evidence about a couple of other plots. President Sukarno of Indonesia, and Papa Doc Duvalier of Haiti. But they didn't take those on.

**Rex Bradford** But to its credit, unlike many other Congressional investigations, they were dogged in pursuit of the facts on these five cases. We learned a great deal about the genesis of the plots, who was involved in them, and they command in control, or lack thereof, in some cases. The Church Committee reached in some areas a pretty solid conclusion, and in other areas the full truth was quite elusive. They were willing to admit that in their report.

**Rex Bradford** Sometimes you may here, I've seen this sometimes on news programs, the idea that these were sort of zany ideas. You know, exploding sea shells, or the coat Castro was supposed to put on that would make his beard fall out and embarrass him. The impression is that these are sort of zany things that were done Keystone cop style never came to fruition. I'd like to counter that a bit by saying that most of the plotting involved machine guns and rifles, and very deadly poisons. And four out of the five people on this list are dead. Only Castro survived.

**Rex Bradford** Actually, the committee itself absolved the CIA and U.S. authorities of direct responsibility in all four of those deaths. I want to go into that a little bit. They concluded the following that the CIA did dispatch poisons to Congo to try to kill Patrice Lumumba, but he was killed instead by Congolese rivals. We'll see there's a bit more to that story. Raphael Trujillo's Dominican enemies were supplied with pistols and carbines by U.S. State Department diplomatic [pouch 00:11:18]. But the committee said, "There's conflicting evidence concerning whether the weapons were knowingly supplied for the assassination, and whether any of them were present at the scene."

**Rex Bradford** Vietnamese leader Diem and his brother were killed in a coup, which the U.S. green lighted, but in which the committee found no evidence that the U.S. favored assassination. General Rene Schneider was not the leader of Chile, but he was a general who was refusing to block the accession of the elected leader Salvador Allende, which was an athema to the Nixon White House. And he was killed in a kidnapping attempt by enemies of his, so called kidnapping anyway.

**Rex Bradford** But the committee said, "It doesn't appear that any of the equipment supplied by the CIA to coup plotters in Chile," and this is machine guns we're talking about, "Was used in the kidnapping. There's no evidence of a plan to kill Schneider, or U.S. officials specifically anticipated Schneider would be shot during an abduction."

**Rex Bradford** Okay, so on the one hand I think it's important that they committee tried to get in the details, and tried to get the details right, and not just say U.S. tried to kill these people, they're dead, end of story. The leaders did have multiple enemies, although we'll see there is a bit more to the story in a few cases. But I think it's also important to see the larger picture. The Trujillo and Schneider conclusions, particularly about direct responsibility, are quite hair splitting. If you were to give somebody automatic weapons to use in a kidnapping, but never dreaming someone would get hurt, and then low and behold they show up dead, try using that defense in a court of law. I'm not a lawyer in fact some of you may be. But accessory to murder is about the minimum that comes to mind I think.

**Rex Bradford** The committee did something also important in laying out the details of the plots, which is to try to answer the question of who authorized them. And that was not an easy one for them. And also the command and control down to lower levels as to how they were executed. And here they ran smack in against what we call plausible denial. The committee wrote [inaudible 00:13:31] read the whole thing, they find that the system of executive command and control was so ambiguous, that it was difficult to be certain at what levels assassination activity was known and authorized. Maybe plots were taken without them really being explicitly authorized. Maybe there's plausible denial, and the committee just wasn't able to penetrate that. They basically in the end, this was in large part their answer to that question.

**Rex Bradford** The paper trail was somewhat thin, which was one of their difficulties. They had to rely mostly upon interviews with various people. One of the few contemporaneous documents is this one from William Harvey, who ran some of the assassination plots at CIA under the code name ZR Rifle, Executive Action Program. This document is fascinating to read. It includes some choice quotes such as never mentioned word assassination in a document he left behind. It also contains this amazing little piece that I don't think you can read here, so I'll read it for you.

**Rex Bradford** "Cover planning should include provision for blaming Soviets or Czechs in case of blow. Should have phony 201 file to back stop this. All documents therein forged and back dated. Should look like a counter espionage file."

**Rex Bradford** Okay, there are some 201 files that are now public. But back when this was written, the idea that any of these things would even become known to Congress, never mind the public, was a little bit far fetched. And so it's fascinating that within the CIA's own filing system, the idea of forging and back dating documents in order to cover tracks, was part of the initial planning of the operation. And this is one of the things people trying to CIA records and others to get at the bottom of things makes it tough.

**Rex Bradford** Importantly, the committee also had access to one very key document, which was a 1967 Inspector General report that the CIA itself had undertaken when pressure to do so by Linden Johnson about the plots to kill Castro. But much of it like I said still came from interviews. And one of their problems was many of the important people were dead. John and Robert Kennedy for instance were dead, as well as Desmond Fitzgerald and Allen Dellis from CIA. And during the committee's investigation itself, more people showed up dead. Sam Giancana, who was part of the Castro plots, was shot in the mouth five times before being interviewed by the Church Committee. And Johnny Roselli, also major part of the plots, did testify before the committee a few times, but then disappeared. And his body was found in a 55 gallon oil drum floating off the coast of Florida.

**Rex Bradford** On the basic question of whether U.S. presidents, specifically Eisenhower and Kennedy for the most part was the focus, authorized these plots. The committee ran head long into an impenetrable fog. One National Security staffer named Robert Johnson did say that he was an NSE meeting when Eisenhower ordered Lumumba's assassination. And he was shocked at the time that this had occurred. But he couldn't remember for the committee the exact words used. The committee pinpointed a particular meeting in which this had to be on August 18, 1960 meeting. In deed within a month of that meeting, a man named Sidney Gottlieb of the Technical Services Division at CIA had been to Fort Detrick, selected the appropriate deadly virus, and was off to the Congo.

**Rex Bradford** But the minutes of the meeting of course don't reflect any of this. And even participants said of course the minutes wouldn't. His account was also disputed by others, or for the most part, people said they just couldn't recall any such thing. It wasn't really disputed quite so directly. Participants in the plot like Deputy Director of Plans Richard Bissell, swore that they had authorization of the top, but of course they had not proof to offer the committee of that.

**Rex Bradford** In the end, the Church Committee said there's basically a few possibilities here. Eisenhower ordered the assassination, but it's not in the written record. Maybe he used a euphemism like getting rid of Lumumba with a wink wink, nudge nudge to CIA director Dellis who was at the meeting. Maybe he said something like that. Oop, but he didn't really mean assassination. Oops, Allen Dellis misinterpreted him. In other words, they failed to resolve the issue completely. And compared with the ambiguity over whether Eisenhower ordered Lumumba's assassination, the idea of whether President Kennedy was part of the Castro plots is positively labyrinth.

**Rex Bradford** The discussion of several plots to kill Castro in the committee's report is the largest section of the report. The first one they documented, although, there are indications there may have been earlier plots. But the first one they documented started in August 1960 when Deputy Director Richard Bissell contacted Sheffield Edwards, who contacted an ex FBI agent named Robert Maheu, who got in touch with Johnny Roselli, who got in touch with his pals Jafa Conty and Giam Cana, and the rest of the so called CIA mafia plots, which you can read about all over the place, and many books. It's history from there.

**Rex Bradford** The Church committee also wrote about some of the zanier plots that I mentioned. Exploding sea shells and so forth. It's also worth noting I think there's a set of plots that they might have investigated, but never took on. There's a famous incident called the Bayo Polly Raid, which was ostensibly in the summer of '63 trying to get supposed Soviet military personnel out of Cuba, but which many people think was a cover for an assassination team. That wasn't part of the committees work.

**Rex Bradford** Also Fidel Castro gave George McGovern a black book of 24 plots against his life. This book was passed along by the Church Committee through the CIA, who basically said, "Yeah, we know, but to these guys, we work with them. We don't know nothing about no assassinations." And the Church Committee essentially took them at their word on that, and they have not gotten the full story on what was going on there.

**Rex Bradford** The last Castro plot the committee discussed in the report, the so called Amlash Operation, is intriguing and is perhaps the poster child for the dilemma that the committee faced on the issue of authorization. I want to give a little background first. In 1963, of course is the aftermath of the Cuban Missile Crisis and Kennedy's No Invasion Pledge. And Cuba policy changed again. 1962's Operation Mongoose of overthrow from within was disbanded. William Harvey, who was heavily involved in that, and had ran a follow of [inaudible 00:20:34] in the Missile Crisis for dispatching sabotage agents into Cuba during the crisis itself, was demoted and essentially sent to Rome. The FBI began conducting raids on Cuban exiles who were conducting operations from U.S. soil. In particular, after in March of '63, Alpha 66 attacked a Soviet vessel off the coast of Cuba.

**Rex Bradford** It's interesting, the Church Committee didn't really get the full story on the second half of '63. And we know a fair amount more, although some of it still remains a bit mysterious. And I'll discuss a little bit of that later. Amlash is a cryptonym, or pseudonym, whatever. I'm sorry, I should know, for a man named Orlando Cubella Sekoties. Cubella had achieved some fame in 1956 for assassinating the head of Betista's security fores in Cuba. By the early '60s, was an official in Cuba's government.

**Rex Bradford** In 1961, he first approached the CIA about defecting, and was persuaded to stay in place. And importantly, some say our officers were very concerned that Cubella was a dangle, a double agent who would report back to Castro just being offered for that purpose. But strangely nevertheless in September of '63 after a year of no contact, a CIA officer met with Cubella in Brazil. There were discussions about overthrowing Castro, which turned into assassination discussions. Cubella, however, warned that he really needed assurances from the higher level, and requested a meeting with Robert Kennedy.

**Rex Bradford** Now, on September 7, on the very same day that Cubella's case officers are [inaudible 00:22:22] headquarters with this news from Brazil, that Cubella is willing to attempt an inside job, Fidel Castro shows up at the Brazilian Embassy in Cuba, and give an interview with an AP reporter and says, "U.S. leaders should think that if they are aiding terrorist plots to eliminate Cuban leaders, they themselves will not be safe." A coded message perhaps?

**Rex Bradford** In any case, what happens next is extraordinary. Special Affairs staff had Desmond Fitzgerald in October met personally with Cubella, and represented himself as a personal emissary of Robert Kennedy. Cubella told Fitzgerald he wanted a high powered rifle. In the end what he got was a poison pen, which was delivered to him on November 22, 1963. The Inspector General report says that they were probably meeting and getting the pen at the very moment Kennedy was shot. Cubella refused the pen. And it gets weirder. Who authorized Fitzgerald to represent himself as a personal emissary of RFK? According to the CIA's Inspector General report, Richard Helms and Fitzgerald had a meeting. And Helms decided it wasn't necessary to talk to RFK, or seek his approval. And when questions by the committee, Helm said he didn't really recall the discussion. But he believed he had preexisting authority for all this sort of thing. And so he wouldn't need to.

**Rex Bradford** This was the committee's dilemma in a nutshell. For some people, it's obvious. Well, the Kennedy's and the CIA are all in this together. And they may have talked off the record, et cetera, et cetera. But it's also true that Cubella's reactivation occurred right at the time when John Kennedy had begun opening back channels to Castro using William Atwood, and others as emissaries to seek raproshma of some kind. And so it's interesting that Fitzgerald, who didn't use his own name by the way, would use RFK's name in an assassination meeting with a Cuban who's bonafides were in question. And the possibility of this getting back to Castro was quite real, and indeed may have. Is it possible this was a game being played to sabotage the raproshma meetings?

**Rex Bradford** The story of Cuba policy in '63 is fairly complex, and wasn't really fully known to the Church Committee. There's the Amtrunk Project, which was a Kennedy initiated overthrow project, which people in CIA hated because it featured Hooray and Manuel Oray, and left wing side of the anti-Castro forces. There's also a project Amworld, which involved Manuel Arteam, and the offshoring him to Nicaragua for an eventual overthrow of Castro from outside. And the Church Committee seems basically unaware of all that, which is interesting. We know a lot more today.

**Rex Bradford** In the interest of time, I'm going to have to skip a little bit. There's a bit more on this whole issue of authorization. There's a famous meeting the committee wrote about where Robert MacNimare himself clearly brought up the concept and it got written down in some memos, and people threw fits over that. But I'm going to move on. Does this green button work? Okay.

**Rex Bradford** The Church Committee reports were published 38 years ago. What have we learned since then? Regarding the Lumumba assassination there have been new developments, although some questions remain. In 2001 a Belgian Commission, Congo had previously been a Belgian colony, admitted being aware of extreme danger to Lumumba's life, and not doing anything, and issued an apology, and a moral responsibility. But author Leto Dewitt has written compellingly that their involvement, which went much further, and in fact Lumumba was killed by a Belgian firing squad.

**Rex Bradford** Allegations of further CIA involvement in that operation have been made beyond the failed poison pill plan that CIA station chief there helped direct the search for Lumumba when he'd escaped from his captors, that they were in direct touch with the killers that very night. And even a CIA agent had carried the body around in the trunk of his car for a while. These allegations have not been made the subject of any government review that I'm aware of.

**Rex Bradford** In a very strange twist, just this past April, a British House of Lords member named David Lee wrote a letter to the London Review of Books, saying that in 2009, he'd had a cup of tea with Daphne Park, who had been British Counsel and first secretary to Congo on '61. And when Mr. Lee brought up the controversy about Lumumba's death, and what whether MI6 might have been involved, Miss Park replied, "We did. I organized it." And there it sits today I think.

**Rex Bradford** There's been no quite so explosive news about some of the other murders, although new details emerge in any of these cases. The Schneider family actually sued Henry Kissinger in 2001. Although that case was eventually dismissed. On the Castro plots, we have a much fuller picture, like I said about 1963 policy, including the simultaneous piece feelers, as well as ongoing plotting and sabotage operations. And it's a complex picture. My general take, although there are subtleties here, but in '63 Kennedy was far more determined to bring about a peaceful world then the rest of his government was. Whether it was being shaken buy the Cuban Missile Crisis, or as someone once told me, "No, no. It was that the Cuban Missile Crisis gave Kennedy the political capital to do what he wanted to do anyway."

**Rex Bradford** In either case, things are moving on several fronts. It was a state secret for 35 years, but now public that in the spring of '63, plans for a complete overthrow for Vietnam were drawn up, and black and white on paper. They're available online, like many of this. From that to Kennedy's peace speech at the American University in June, which announcing a whole new orientation toward the Soviet Union, which was followed up by a Nuclear Test Band Treaty in the hotline, to these peace feelers towards Castro, which were being explored at the very moment that he died.

**Rex Bradford** At the same time, Kennedy was a pretty pragmatic and tough leader, who certainly didn't want Cuba to be an issue in the '64 elections. The Vietnam plans for that matter for instance were kind of too cutely delayed for the most part, until after the '64 election as well for political purposes. And so I think he's willing to perceive the multiple tracks. And the question about whether those multiple tracks included being aware of and condoning assassination plots remains with us to this day.

**Rex Bradford** There's even a little bit more about that. There's a memo that I'm going to skip over for time, in which RFK is quoted a little ambiguously, but very intriguingly about opportunities offered around Castro. The dilemma the Church Committee faced hasn't changed much, but there's a little bit more for people that are interested to dig into. But I'm going to try to move on a little bit towards the subject of our weekend here. Okay.

**Rex Bradford** The second topic that I want to talk about is another aspect of the committee's work undertaken by a subcommittee of theirs. Headed by Senators Richard Shweiker and Gary Hart. The full name of the resulting report is The Investigation of the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy Performance of the Intelligence Agencies. The context here is this: by 1975, it's 12 years after the assassination, 11 years after the Warren Report. Number of books critiquing the single bullet theory, and many more aspects that have been written that are critical. They had an impact, but there was no Federal re-review yet. The momentum hadn't built for that.

**Rex Bradford** But in July of 1975, a story emerged that Lee Oswald had been to the FBI office in Dallas and dropped off a note, which then had been destroyed by Agent Hosty under orders of [inaudible 00:30:42] boss after Oswald was killed. Testimony was taken in the House of Representatives surrounding this. One question remained which was whether the contents of the note was an innocuous complaint in Hosty's version, or a threat to blow up the FBI building in the words of the secretary who received the note, and gave it to Hosty.

**Rex Bradford** But in any case, this was one more chapter in sort of an ongoing story of serious questions about Warren Report, and in particular whether the Warren Commission had been served well by the FBI and CIA that they used as their prime investigative arms. This was the question the that the Shweiker/Hart subcommittee took up for obvious reasons. One of their focuses was why didn't anybody tell them about he plots to kill Castro? Maybe that was relevant. And in fact, J. Lee Rank and the Warren Commissions Executive Director said, "Yes, that would have been very relevant."

**Rex Bradford** But they did more than that. They dug in. It was a partial probe as we'll see that didn't really get into the assassination details per say. But covered some important ground particularity around what we might call a coverup. We've learned about a lot of the federal response to the after math of the assassination over the years, particularly where they release Lyndon Johnson's phone calls in the 1990's. The Church Committee helped to get the ball rolling. They published a portion of this now famous memo from Nicholas [Catzenback 00:32:15], the Assistant Attorney General, which he began drafting within hours of Oswald being killed, and sent to Bill Moyers of the Johnson White House the next day, the day of the funeral.

**Rex Bradford** It says in part, the public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin, that he did not have confederates who were still at large, and that the evidence was such he would have been convicted at trial. Now, some defenders of this memo will point out that that does open by saying it's important that all the facts about the assassination be made public. And [Catzenbach 00:32:49] himself was questioned about this later during the House Committee, and fumbled a bit. Then finally said, "Well, I don't think it's too artistically worded."

**Rex Bradford** But artistic phrasing or not, it doesn't change one basic fact, which is that the Monday after the assassination, there's not a single person in the world who's in a position to truthfully say that Oswald was the assassin and there are no confederates. I mean, with Ruby's shooting of Oswald the day before, the smart money is on the opposite conclusion. This is not a statement of any facts at this time. This is a policy statement.

**Rex Bradford** Even [Catzenbach's 00:33:22] memo admits this. He goes on to say, "Unfortunately, the facts on Oswald seem about too obvious." Marxist Russian wife, et cetera. The Church Committee also revealed that in the aftermath of the assassination, Director Hoover disciplined secretly 17 FBI personnel for their failures in regard to it. They dug in a little deeper in some other areas, including the story of the Oswald trip to Mexico City, which I'm going to talk just a little bit about, and about what we've learned much more sense.

**Rex Bradford** In general though, I think that the stories told by the committee aren't as vigilly important as the overall picture that they were able to paint through them. They were careful to say that they didn't dispute the Warren Commission's conclusions per say having not reviewed them, but they were pretty stark about what they thought was going on. The committee has developed evidence which impeaches the process by which the intelligence agencies arrive at their own conclusions about the assassination, and by which they provide information to the Warren Commission. The evidence indicates that they investigation of the assassination was deficient.

**Rex Bradford** And on the Face the Nation TV program in 1976, Senator Shweiker went further. He said, "The Warren Report has collapsed like a house of cards. The investigation was snuffed out before it even began. And the fatal mistake the Warren Commission made was not to use its own investigators, but to rely upon the CIA and FBI, which plated directly into the hands of senior intelligence officials who directed the cover up."

**Rex Bradford** It's been a while since a U.S. Senator spoke on national television about the Kennedy assassination cover up, but it did happen. By the way, on the subject that's been brought up about what's missing from the records we now have, a subject near and dear to my heart, it's clear that the 50,000 pages of released Church Committee records is pretty willfully incomplete. For one thing actually, what's public now is only the stuff directly related to assassination plotting and the Kennedy assassination. Not the huge universe of Church Committee files, and all their other investigations, which remain sealed to this day.

**Rex Bradford** But even within that more narrow focus, I took the exercise one time of going through those two reports and looking at all the footnotes in them, and counting up the ones that the transcripts for those were not public. And there were 40 of them. Many of them completely directly related to the Kennedy assassination and things that should be public. I was talking with Joan Melon here yesterday says that if you look at the drafts of some of these reports and other materials of their interviews, which are not even discussed in those reports are mentioned. So there's a whole universe of materials, including interviews with customs officials, and other people that might shed some light on Oswald's connection with U.S. Intelligence agencies. So there's more there.

**Rex Bradford** The Church Committee spent some time chasing down the rabbit hole of allegations of Cuban involvement in the assassination. And I think this is very important, because every investigation that Kennedy's murder has come up against this. Old and new allegations that Fidel Castro was in some way behind Kennedy's murder. Some of those stories are listed here if you could see them. They include Gil Berto, Alverado Agarte, the Warren Commission called him D. The Nicaraguan undercover agent who said he saw Oswald take $6,500 in the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City to kill Kennedy. They include Pedro Gutierrez Valencia, accredited examiner who saw Oswald take money to kill Kennedy outside the Cuban Embassy. There's a story about a twist party, with the secretary, and the Cuban consulate who dealt with Oswald, where they were seen together. And more stories. Some more laughable than others. Including the Pedro Charles letter, which was supposedly written to friend Lee from inside Cuba on November 10, before the assassination. But it was actually post marked five days after the assassination.

**Rex Bradford** The committee writes about some of these stories. And there were many more that were unknown to the committee that have been the House Committee a few years later dealt with. An obvious question is are any of them for real? I mean, it's pretty hard to believe that Oswald was taking money both inside and outside the Cuban Embassy to kill Kennedy. Are they all after the fact propaganda operations? Simply taking advantage of JFK's death to try to finger Castro and get an added benefit?

**Rex Bradford** I'm going to skip a little dan Hardway is quoted in Gaeton Fonzi's book with an interesting quote about his belief that David Philips had a connection to every single one of the allegations that were coming forth, and maybe someone will ask him about today. I'm going to skip over that, and talk just very briefly about this issue of the so called Mexico City tapes. It's a long, convoluted story I'm not going to have time to get into. But I want to make a couple points. To summarize, in October of 1963, the Mexico City CIA station reported to headquarters the visit an American to the Soviet Embassy based on tapped telephone conversations of a man calling himself Lee Oswald. And after the assassination, the transcripts of these tapes, would cause great consternation in the halls of power in Washington. Because in one conversation, Oswald made reference to a prior meeting with a man named [Castacauve 00:39:14]. Valerie [Castacuave 00:39:15] was KGB naturally, but much more ominously he was in the FBI and CIA files as being Department 13, Sabotage and Assassinations.

**Rex Bradford** And also captured on tape, was a cryptic comment that this Oswald made that lead some leader to believe that the Cuban's were housing him in Mexico City while he was there on his visit. This is the context in which Lyndon Johnson put together the Warren Commission, and banded about the figure of 40 million Americans who would die in a nuclear exchange with the Soviets.

**Rex Bradford** Transcripts of Oswald's call, what about the tapes themselves? Well, the received story is that the tapes were erased to routinely recycle before the assassination. But the recycling story itself only developed after FBI Director Hoover told the White House and the Secret Service in writing that on November 23 these tapes were still in existence. FBI special agents listened to them. They had Oswald right there in the jail cell in Dallas. And they determined it wasn't his voice on the tapes. Oswald the loser, who nobody ever heard of, is impersonated on tapped telephone lines in a foreign country before the assassination. And a man at which connects him to Soviet and Cubans. Interesting.

**Rex Bradford** Anyway, it turns out that back in 1976 ... This is one of the memos that went to the Secret Service about this. Impossible to read. It turns out the Church Committee was actually onto this story, although only pursued it a little ways back in 1976 regarding the FBI's assertion that like the CIA was saying at the time, "Oh the tapes had been routinely recycled. It was all a big mistake. Nobody ever really listened to them."

**Rex Bradford** Staffer Paul Wallic wrote a memo saying, "The staff's admits that the matter is not as simple as the Bureau asserts." Not as simple indeed. Much later, to Warren Commission staffers would say that they listened to these tapes in April of 1964 when they went down to Mexico City as part of the Warren Commission's investigation. Although the idea of who's voice was on the tapes was not even a question that was on their minds.

**Rex Bradford** The Church Committee also didn't have access to the recordings of Lyndon Johnson. Declassified only in the 1990's after the passage of the JFK Records Act. And some of these calls are quite enlightening. The very first call President Johnson had with FBI Director Hoover on the morning after the Kennedy assassination at 10:00, Johnson asked about Mexico City. He got this answer, "No, that's one angle that's very confusing for this reason: we have up here the tape and the photograph of the man who was at the Soviet Embassy using Oswald's name. The picture and the tape do not correspond to this man's voice, nor to his appearance. In other words, it appears there's a second person who was at the Soviet Embassy down there."

**Rex Bradford** And it turns out there's actually a little problem with this tape, too. We have the transcript, but this presidential phone call has itself been erased as I discovered when I made a bit of a pest of myself at the LBJ library in Austin. I'm wondering if somebody could click the little speaker icon. I don't know if we're able to hear it. Volume maybe? There's not much to hear anyway. Well, maybe the eraser's been erased. Anyway, what there is is 14 minutes of basically pure hiss. And I got a couple years of a phony story from people at the LBJ library about Johnson's Vice President show taping equipment being inadequate. And that's why the audio sounds like that. Seriously. However, I pointed out to them that the phone calls before and after on the same day all sound fine. And they repeated their story.

**Rex Bradford** Finally, a couple years later, I wrote an essay about this on the History Matters website that I also run. And I guess they got a few letters and phone calls or emails. Because finally they sent me this memo. And I actually don't have the date of the analysis. I cut and paste this, but it's interesting the date of audio engineering analysis, which was included in this letter, was actually from a year before I first contacted them. They were sitting on this for a few years.

**Rex Bradford** And basically, it's a very short engineering report. The jist of which is "Most likely the belt was intentionally erased by rubbing it against the magnet included in most models of the belt machines. But a small portion was missed. Because you could hear a little clicking of voices periodically in the tape.

**Rex Bradford** I find this interesting. The Nixon 18 minute tape gap consumed America for over a year and a half. And I did my bit to try to get the story about this thing out. To me, the idea that an erased presidential phone all from less than 24 hours after Kennedy's murder has not been a major news story is sort of emblematic of why we're here today.

**Rex Bradford** I guess I just like to say that I think the Church Committee investigation was a rare and worthy endeavor. Happened at kind of at a unique time which I think enabled it to happen. There are many people in the past and today who will willingly seek great power to secret agencies in the name of fighting bad guys. And I would suggest that they might do well to read to reports of the Church Committee to see what happened last time around. Thank you.

**Rex Bradford** Any questions? Sure.

**Speaker 2** Questions.

**Lenard** Lenard Maharowksi's my name. I'm a licensed private detective here in Pennsylvania. Has anyone considered John Kennedy's executive orders may have contributed or been the nail in the coffin of the decision makers to finally decide to take him out?

**Rex Bradford** Are you referring to a particular executive order?

**Lenard** I understand there was one that may have begun the dismantling of the Federal Reserve.

**Rex Bradford** Yeah, I mean, I guess I'll say two things. One is that working strictly from motive for murder or when you have somebody like John Kennedy, or any president, is problematic because you can find it everywhere. This is we have mafia theories, CIA, Joint Chiefs of Staff, you name it. But I do agree in general that it's been striking to me how I follow a lot of the story of the declassified records and what new things come out. And the amount of stuff related to Kennedy foreign policy decisions, you know some of it known at the time, but it's come out in drips and drabs over the years. The picture you know if you read books now on Vietnam history from the era, they've all been subtly changing over time. It was all like Kennedy and Johnson were like cut from the same cloth for years, and years, and years. And there was a funny gap in the Pentagon papers during the transition.

**Rex Bradford** The story has emerged that regardless of the sort of I guess un-noble question I suppose of what might have happened had Kennedy live, it's absolutely clear now that there were black and white withdrawal plans on the books. Kennedy was serious about them. They actually began them in October of '63. And I talked about the April of '63 plans for withdrawal of Vietnam. In November 20th, there was the last meeting while Kennedy was alive on his trip. There were no change in those plans at that time.

**Rex Bradford** I'm not trying to say Vietnam is the answer. That's one of many areas in foreign policy where the landscape was changing and the people who look for motive for murder there, it's a rich field.

**Speaker 4** Yes, I was curious whether you thought that with all the impersonations of Oswald and with what was going on with the Church Committee finding out about the impersonations, so on and so forth, do you think this possibly led to Operation Northwoods really becoming assassination of President Kennedy? It's a speculation that I have these days.

**Rex Bradford** I try not to speculate too much. But I will pose a question. Suppose on November 22, in the afternoon, Oswald doesn't show up captured in the Texas theater, but he's dead on the streets of Dallas. And maybe there's a visa in his pocket, or who knows what. And there are now tapes of a man using his name down in Mexico City and he's dead. Nobody's going to compare or do voice comparisons on these tapes now. The whole landscape of what happened in the aftermath might be a very different, scarier thing than actually happened.

**Speaker 4** Follow up on that ... Would the Air Force One be [inaudible 00:48:24]

**Speaker 5** We'll take this. If we have time, we'll come back to you.

**Speaker 4** Sure.

**Speaker 6** I wondered, Rex, if you've heard about the Charlie Betallia, who was in charge of the select subcommittee on intelligence of the time of the review board investigation.

**Rex Bradford** The name rings a bell, but no.

**Speaker 6** And the fact that both [Nara 00:48:53] on the review board, both suffered extreme road blocking for access to a lot of these documents. And in the end, they came up with a very temporary, it was a very poor compromise. Because they were allowed just three days with interns to do the research, to look at the extra material. And in the end, I don't think they got anywhere near. I mean, we taught yesterday about the eight binders. The indexing to the Church Committee, which in my opinion should be released. I know Joan asked Judge Tungheim I think the last time you had a conference about why wasn't the balance of the church committee finds. Why weren't they released?

**Rex Bradford** I agree. There were what, five or six million pages in the so called JFK collection, so a huge universe of documents were released, but depending on where you draw your umbrella, and even a conservative drawing of that, there's many areas in which stuff is still not there.

**Speaker 6** Of missing documents from the Church files. And they sought to explain 50 pieces of missing testimony to me. And in the end, they acknowledged, yeah, there were 33 pieces of missing testimony.

**Speaker 7** Two things you mentioned: one the November 22 meeting in I think you said it was Brazil. Desmond Fitzgerald saying he was acting on ...

**Rex Bradford** That meeting was actually in Paris.

**Speaker 7** In Paris, but acting on behalf of RFK, he claims. And then the memo from [Catzenbach 00:50:45] on the 25th, which obviously suggests very quickly the desire for cover up, or a desire to sort of smooth this over. I'm wondering, is there anything in the documentary trail that shows what RFK is doing, saying, thinking during those few days immediately after the assassination? I mean, he's still the Attorney General.

**Rex Bradford** Should probably talk to the guy next to you, but in general, you know, in terms of official actions he was pretty hands off. He's grieving, and [Catzenbach 00:51:18] is you know, running with the ball on that. But behind the scenes, the afternoon of the assassination itself, he's at Hickory Hill. John MacCone comes up, and they talk for a few hours. He makes a phone call to Hames Johnson and Harry Reeves Williams, who were part of this whole Cuban Operation stuff that he's involved in, and says to them, "One of your guys did this."

**Rex Bradford** The precise meeting of that can still be debated. The whole question of Robert Kennedy's reaction, and his general silence on it I think is a fascinating topic, which I'm not sure anybody's ever gotten quite to the bottom of it. I don't know. Read Brothers though for a good overview of that.

**Rex Bradford** There's also a story in David's book, and was also in a book previously that Robert and Jacky sent William Walton, a family friend, as a personal emissary to Moscow a week after the assassination to deliver the news to [Crustchaev 00:52:33] that we know this wasn't you guys, this was a big domestic plot, and Bobby's going to try to become president later and carry on John's work, which is an amazing story.
