**Speaker 1** Please don't go away. We're going to have some [inaudible 00:00:03] theater. Tom Hayden.

**Tom Hayden** I think that from the very fact that the Cambodian government has been overthrown since the Laos Day Committee was created, we can draw a very important political lesson in trying to figure out what to do, and that lesson is that there is an entire world that is in the state of revolutionary internment. Things are moving very fast and it's no longer possible for us to isolate one event from another and to simply struggle against the war in Vietnam or the war on Laos, where all that we're, just three or four years ago, the thesis of the Cubans and of Che Guevara in particular, that two or three, many Vietnams had to be created, where that was seen as a strategic opportunity, as something that should be done because the United States was bogged down in Vietnam, something that should be done in Latin America.

**Tom Hayden** I think now that we see that that strategy of two, three, how many Vietnams is becoming a necessity. It's not something that we choose to do, it's something that Nixon's expansion of aggression everywhere in the world forces us to see as the only road, that is the only way for there to be independence, the people of Vietnam or Laos or Cambodia, will be now with, not with a modest change in American policy, but with a sweeping and total change, American foreign and domestic policy.

**Tom Hayden** I think that that's what is weighing very heavily on people. I think that we've spent a lot of time since Nixon came to office engaged in, kind of, the debate in our head about where we stood, where things were at and how heavy the crisis facing ourselves was going to be. There were a lot of people on the left who said that the war in Vietnam was going to be eminent because there wasn't any interest of capitalism to destroy itself over there in such a small country.

**Tom Hayden** That rational men would get into office in Washington or rational men who would direct Washington from the financial centers of the United States to cut out the war in Vietnam, so as to restore some stability.

**Tom Hayden** I think that Nixon has to put that to rest, and that now it should be a clear forevermore that the United States has a commitment to empire and that as the pillar of a worldwide empire, the United States has to defend every possession, every piece of territory in the world, and that there will not be a withdrawal from one country until there is a solution throughout all of Southeast Asia, Asia, and perhaps other continents.

**Tom Hayden** That makes it very hard for us to decide what to do, because we're living in a situation where a revolution is as total as imperialism, that what we must change is as broad as the empire that stands against us. If you simply look at just the papers, you see that we need a lot more flags than the flags on the stage around us, because we're engaged in a battle that involves many countries.

**Tom Hayden** If you look at the sources of the oppression, you see the United States evolve down into Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. But in Thailand, where it was revealed this week that this university, the University of California, has had contracts for the last four years, making this university the coordinator of all counterinsurgency and research of activities in the United States for the country of Thailand.

**Tom Hayden** If you look at the nation of Korea, just using the word Korea probably sends people back into the 1950s. Our ordinary assumption is to believe that the Korean War is over. Korean a war is not over. There's no way to resolve the conflict in Korea until it's carried further. The Korean War was put on the back burner, something that many people, perhaps, in the American government would like to do with Vietnam, and find they can not.

**Tom Hayden** But just recently in Korea, political dissidence in South Korea, very much like the people who 12, 14 years ago formed the Viet Cong in South Vietnam have issued a proclamation, a manifesto, a statement, very similar to the one that announced the beginning of arms struggle in South Vietnam. Proclamation from revolutionaries in South Korea, that they were together going to resume a military, as well as a political struggle against the government in Seoul. We don't even know about it.

**Tom Hayden** The New York Times did not [inaudible 00:06:05] to print it. You'd have to read the Black Panther paper to find out about it. If you read that paper to find out about Korea, you can also read it to find out about the Panthers, and see that the war is not even abroad. The war is at home, same war is being waged against the Black Panther Party in this country that was waged against the Central Committee.

**Tom Hayden** For instance, the Viet Minh, during the so-called peaceful illegal period in South Vietnam in the 1950s, when 22 out of 23 members of the Central Committee were killed, it's the same kind of battle. In order to look at it that way, it becomes almost necessary to see that even though it feels like we are at peace, we're already involved in a war. We are only living in peace at the expense of people who are fighting. We're only living at peace because the options have not closed for us, and other people are fighting for us.

**Tom Hayden** The Vietnamese are fighting for us, [inaudible 00:07:20] at Laos are fighting for us. And I mean a concrete way. If they were not, they would not ask [inaudible 00:07:27] or other people to come into their liberated zones, to write articles, to go back and tell the American people. They would not have bothered bringing people to Vietnam, Southeast Asia, to show conditions there to us, because they know that remote as this auditorium is from the cave where the legitimate government of Laos is now centered, remote as that connection is between the cave and the auditorium, in some people's minds, there just will be no liberation and no security for any small country until the American empire is taken apart, dismantled and buried. And that will require struggle by people inside of the United States house, not simply abroad.

**Tom Hayden** I have two particular suggestions about action that I wanted to make, and then hope that we can turn this into some kind of action meeting. These suggestions really have to do with Berkeley, because I'm very interested in Berkeley. I think that we all know that Berkeley has been the center of, the beginning of the struggle against the Vietnam War several years ago. In fact, we had a Vietnam Day committee, I understand.

**Tom Hayden** Evidently there's a repetition of that process implied by forming the kind of committee that's been formed out of this educational program tonight. There's no doubt to people in Berkeley, it's all about still, that we have a lot of international interest and responsibility, but I think that we could see our role more clearly, we saw ourselves as an international city.

**Tom Hayden** What I mean by that is a state of mind more than something to do with territory at this point. A state of mind, but, a state of mind that would allow us to see things in a very different way and act in a very different way.

**Tom Hayden** I also think that we should see ourselves as the People's Park, as we should turn around a lot of our conceptions. In the People's Park struggle, we saw the university as being the dominant institution in Berkeley that was taking this land, using it for no good reason. People should have the land back to struggle against the university to get it back. But, in that struggle I think we began to see ourselves as being residents of a new kind of People's Park that should spread, not be located on a vacant lot off the avenue, but should spread in the state of mind, then take root all over the community and outside of Berkeley.

**Tom Hayden** In that concession the university and its personnel became weeds that had to be cleared out of People's Park. In that concession, we were not asking the university for the right to use the land, but we were asking what was the university with its war machinery, and with its agricultural machinery doing around People's Park.

**Tom Hayden** That would give you a more aggressive state of mind, a state of mind that laid claim to territory, and a state of mind that had no particular regards for private property or for institutions that have taken it from the Indians and the original owners and to give you a state of mind that said that it's necessary to see this territory as ours, and to remove those who have settled here to impose a dictatorship with all their machinery, a dictatorship on us and other people around the world.

**Tom Hayden** Now, if we saw Berkeley, not just as a city where an anti-war movement would get going, or a city where we could recruit a lot of people to go on anti-war marches or engage in anti-war activity, which is obviously true if you look at it from one angle. But if we saw Berkeley as an international city, we would have a different attitude about what goes on in Berkeley, what's happening at the draft board in Berkeley, what's happening with ROTC and Berkeley, what's happening with the university, which is the center of the Pentagon's nuclear establishment, which has people on its payroll from here to Los Alamos. A university, which contracts for all research related to Thailand and God knows what else, here.

**Tom Hayden** This university is probably the most important university in the United States in perpetuating the war machinery. I think it's the most important. I think it's at the top of the pyramid. I think that's why Charles Hitch was sent here. Look at who the president of this so-called university is. He is not an educator, right? He is not an administrator of educational functions. He is a man who comes from the Department of Defense, and from the Rand Corporation, a man who sits on the Asia Foundation, which dispenses CIA funds, and engineer of the Institute for Defense Analysis.

**Tom Hayden** He is a man who was part of the brain trust under McNamara in the Pentagon, and who has more than any other person, then the engineer of a very necessary part of American foreign policy, which is the integration and the coordination of a number of major universities with the Pentagon. A number of years ago we were shocked when we found out that these Michigan State University professors were doing this so-called research in South Vietnam, like modernizing the police department for [inaudible 00:14:06], improving police administration, and the shock has worn off, but the process continues. That's what Hitch is all about. That's Hitch's job. It's what Hitch does. He engineered that.

**Tom Hayden** All right, if he has been named by a board of regions to be the president of the university, I suggest that we figure out what the university is, not from textbooks about universities and not from schools of education, which talk about education while they set up school systems in Thailand and Saigon, but that we've learned from practice. And we've learned from the practice of the university what the university is. That we learned from where its money goes, where its personnel goes, what it's thrust is, we learned from that, and not from an occasional classroom where somebody speaks in radical language. We learn from the thrust of the university what it's about. What we see if we do that is that we are not sitting near a university at all, here in Berkeley, in an international city. We're sitting on the outskirts of something that is more like the Pentagon or an American embassy.

**Tom Hayden** It's true. Look at the buildings. Look at the new buildings that are going up. What do they remind you of? All the learning reminds you of [inaudible 00:15:37] an atmosphere in your mind of being at peace with books. Do you feel when you walk out on campus that your mind is being deepened by everything that you see and pegged in? No, the university is building buildings that look like fortresses. The university is escalating the number of police on its faculty, the number of the police in so-called graduate student roles, the number of police who are so-called students, spying on other students in classes, and number of people just generally, vagrantly wandering around Sproul Plaza and the Avenue looking for you and me.

**Tom Hayden** It's escalated. Why was it escalated? Was it escalated because the university wants to protect the academic freedom of the students and faculty? Do you really think that the university is being militarized because it wants to protect the free exchange of ideas? It's not a free exchange of ideas that's at stake in the university. It's the free exchange of contracts, the free exchange of contracts between the university and the millionaire.

**Tom Hayden** That's what has to be protected. In fact, this has already been pointed out to us and the words are in our head. You remember when Bobby Seale and other people from the Panthers came here last year during the black studies struggle, when some scientists were having a struggle with their consciences, in the Pauley Ballroom. It was a convocation about the responsibility to social science, while outside there was a struggle over black studies.

**Tom Hayden** Bobby Seale said that black studies are all right, but the only black studies that will be accepted at the University of California are black counterinsurgency studies. And the only reason, the only reason that the police are on campus is not to protect the students from each other, but to protect the basic program of the university, which he called studies in genocide. That's what the university does.

**Tom Hayden** Now, if you say that you're a member of an international city, which is trying to maybe have a flag of its own, so that people can speak on the Koreans and the Cubans and the Vietnamese and the Laotians and the Cambodians and the people of Berkeley. They're talking about people who are fighting, people who are struggling. If you see yourself as part of a world in which your countrymen are just as much as in Vietnam as here, in which your citizenship is international, and later for the United States, then, see, you have to drop all of these conceptions. We had to drop this conceptions of being American citizens, citizens of the United States who pay taxes and vote and are responsible for the United States.

**Tom Hayden** More particularly here, the conception that we are students of the university. We're not students at the university or citizens, we are either accomplices in what is going on, or we are enemies of the United States. When that basic division becomes clear, then you see the university, not as a center of academic freedom that has to be gilded, that has to be left untouched, but a pillar of imperialism that has to be destroyed. That's the whole state of mind.

**Tom Hayden** It's not a pleasant thing, and it's not just something to get worked up about. Because, to develop this state of mind means people have to go through a lot of changes, all of us. It's very difficult to go into that university with all of what you have been told about education, or instead of this community near the university, with all that you've been told about education, and suddenly wipe all of that out and see the university in all of its essential ugliness. It's easier to look at the Pentagon, or thinking about the Pentagon in your mind. The Pentagon, military, guns, violence, genocide.

**Tom Hayden** There's no liberal imagery that floats into our minds when we think about the Pentagon like there is we thinking about that institution here in Berkeley, the University of California.

**Tom Hayden** If you look at it that way, then most concrete aid that we can give and this international struggle is to make it impossible for the war functions of the university to go on. Now, that's a strategy. How that is important is because the university is just one of five or six schools, MIT, Harvard, the University of Michigan, you know the names, which are essential for the conduct of this war.

**Tom Hayden** If we have a real power here, because of the power of these universities, just like the power of everything else in the United States has been centralized, so that at the top of the educational structure, where it ties in with the Pentagon, there are only five or 10 schools where the money is, the manipulators are, the researchers are, and the apparatuses for carrying on the total military program of the United States government. It's here.

**Tom Hayden** People who are here, people who can harass and attack and stop a war machine from functioning in Berkeley are people who are putting that war machinery into a very, very deep crisis. It's like when after the FSM and some other struggles, Seymour Martin Lipset, one of the ace counterinsurgency experts domestically, leaves the faculty here and it goes to the Harvard thinking he'll get peace of mind, and just then Harvard shuts down, and he has nothing to do there.

**Tom Hayden** You had that struggle, which has shut down Harvard, which has shut down Michigan, the University of Michigan, just a couple of weeks ago, is a struggle over whether or not the top educational machinery that's necessary to their war effort is going to be allowed freely and with immunity to conduct itself and to continue. That's a struggle that we can do something about.

**Tom Hayden** It's not counter-posed closed to those who want to March on the Bank of America, because that escalates the struggle in a sense by teaching us who really has stakes in Asia and why the United States is not going to get out. This strategy is not counter-posed to those people who want to expand the numbers of people in the anti-war movement by going to the working class or by exploiting so-called other constituencies.

**Tom Hayden** But this strategy that I'm suggesting is one that says the numbers are present, they've been present since 1965. But the people who are concerned about the war in Vietnam and concerned about the nationalism have not yet really seen themselves as part of a war. But rather, they still see themselves as university students and taxpayers and protestors. It's that change that's required, a change that will shut down the arteries so that they can not produce ROTC officers, so that they can not produce studies on how to expand the police force in Thailand, so that can not conduct the nuclear research or administer it from here, so that they can't do the things that they're doing.

**Tom Hayden** These are the matters that people who live in Berkeley have real power over, and this is the way I think that our seriousness is finally tested. Whether we have any kind of struggle, with the media institutions oppressing the people of the Third World right here in our own backyard, or whether we continue to zigzag looking either for more people or for a higher level of intellectual consciousness.

**Tom Hayden** Fighting for our people and having a higher political and intellectual consciousness is good. It's good. But, the thing that gets more people, and the thing that gets better consciousness, is a fighting movement that proves to people that it is possible to defeat the war-makers in the university and shove them out of Berkeley, and have people waiting for them in Stanford, in Ann Arbor, in Madison, in Cambridge, anywhere they go, so that they won't be able to do business there. That I think is a much different kind of struggle than we've had in the anti-war movement so far.

**Tom Hayden** Now I recognize that people may think this is too narrow or crazy or whatnot. So, I have a second, simpler suggestion, and that is that we have constituted some kind of machinery for developing our internationalism at Berkeley. We need relations with the whole international struggle. We need a foreign ministry. We need an international affairs department of the Berkeley movement. What that would mean, concretely, is a group of people who will take on a whole range of tasks.

**Tom Hayden** One of them is continual education on the streets, in the classrooms and everywhere, about what's going on in the world. Putting out posters, selling the Black Panther paper, giving out information through forums like this one, but continually increasing the educational awareness so that we don't come to the question of Laos five years after we should've come to it.

**Tom Hayden** Secondly, sending people from Berkeley and the Bay area to other countries, in activities like the Venceremos Brigade, or in trysts to Third World, so that some kind of direct contact between people here in the Bay area and the Third World is continually established and deepened, so the people bring back information.

**Tom Hayden** A body of people that would do all of these educational activities would not simply be just an abstract body, but would be a permanent body to call actions and to organize people. There should be no lecture hall in the university where there's a military social scientist lecturing without somebody leafleting and raising questions of it inside the classroom.

**Tom Hayden** There are many things of that nature that can be done in small groups to make these people pack up and get out of the university and some kind of international machinery at Berkeley. A committee that serves the people of Berkeley in this tremendous need for us to coordinate ourselves with the international struggle and to see what we're doing as part of a general universal total breakout of people all over the world into a new world is very necessary. I think that it can be organized in the near future so that things like this are no longer ad hoc or episodic, because revolution is worldwide and the revolution is permanent.
