**Speaker 1** Welcome to this public meeting of the Working People's Alliance. I'm very proud to say, it is the first public meeting we have had for the year. I just love all you. I want to devote my discussion tonight to a brief examination of the particular period which we are living through in Guyana at the moment. I want to distinguish this period as one that began on July the 11th, 1979.

**Speaker 1** The early morning of July 11th, we are building in [inaudible 00:00:43] street. This is a period that has been marked by two developments. It has been marked by increased, instilled violence. And it has been marked by the increasing deterioration in the living standards of the poor Blackness of our Guyanese brothers and sisters. It is important to realize that these two things go together.

**Speaker 1** Brother Thomas, a long time ago, wrote the fundamental document of our party. It was a document out of which we derived the slogan "Well in Justice." And "Well in Justice" has remained the slogan of the Working People's Alliance. And we will adhere to that slogan and fight for that slogan for as long as it is necessary.

**Speaker 1** In that paper, Brother Thomas demonstrated the way in which the social services are collapsing around us. And we need to understand the link, the fundamental link, between the violence of the State and this kind of deterioration in our ordinary lives. And subjecting this period to analysis, we need to try to understand where this violence comes from. We need to identify the various forms of this violence. How it is our priority, and why it must continue to operate until the Guyanese people take their destiny into their hands and free up themselves and their children.

**Speaker 1** Let us first of all distinguish the very corporal forms of State violence. The kind of violence that has been unleashed against the sugar workers of this country when they went on legitimate strike action to claim their legitimate share of the profit. What did the regime do? We've said these things before, but we cannot say them too often. Because we need to pay attention to the responses of the regime, their agitation of the masses. Because only with that kind of perspective that you can come to understand the nature of the State today.

**Speaker 1** For these overt forms of violence, you realize for example, that whenever the question of power is put on the agenda ... whenever it's a question of election, or the referendum ... whenever it's a question of worker action in defense of their interests ... the nakedness of the violence comes out for all to see. And this violence has taken some terrible forms in the recent months.

**Speaker 1** We have seen and lived through political murder. We have lived through the murder of [Paul Rebak 00:03:05], murdered by the folks of the regime outside the main police station of this city. We have lived through the murder of Brother [Korma 00:03:05], shot down in cold blood by the police. We have witnessed the murder of Brother [Gabriel 00:03:05] in [Risma Mackenzie 00:03:05], shot down in the back as he was coming out of a night club. And they tried to claim that Gabriel was a criminal. Now when a regime degenerates to the point of political murder, it is a very serious matter. And we need to be careful in Guyana that we do not become numb to these things.

**Speaker 1** Because that is what the regime needs. It needs us to become numb. The way they have tried to make the masters of Haiti numb to violence. And when we become immune to this kind of violence, they can carry it out more and more nakedly against the people. So we need to be vigilant. It is only vigilance and agitation and protest against these forms of violence that will preserve us in this country.

**Speaker 1** There are still, since July 11th, a systematic campaign on the part of the regime to liquidate our party, the Working People's Alliance. But we stand here tonight and tell you that in spite of oppression, in spite of the court, in spite of the police, in spite of the dogs, the Working People's Alliance is not liquidated.

**Speaker 1** We believe in the party; that what we represent is the most decent aspirations of the Guyanese working people. And you cannot liquidate the most decent aspirations of a people. They will continue to live there, they will [inaudible 00:05:36], but they cannot be liquidated. And we want to serve that notice on the regime. They can bring down their pressure, but the Working People's Alliance came out of July the 27th as a liaison, and declared to the people of the accord of the political scene and the political party, and that we are here to stay. Let the regime hear that loud and clear. We are going nowhere.

**Speaker 1** We have seen a lot of very sinister development, which is the way in which the courts of the country are being systematically abused. And in this regard, I want to draw your attention to the activity, the action taken, by a particularly brave Guyanese sister, Sister [inaudible 00:06:28] of that sister. Because, in that situation, in the judiciary, all kinds of rights are being looted. When that sister is being called by Chief Justice, who's been called by the Chancellor, who's been called by the Executive President-to-be, and being called with it all, she said, "I will not do it!" So let us hold up that sister, and recognize that in that attitude of resistance and courage, lies the future of Guyana.

**Speaker 1** Expect more and more of corrupted players to come out, and to stand up and to resist the regime. You see, they can do nothing against the people's resistance. This is what we need to understand. This was the lesson of Iran. This was the lesson of Grenada. This is the lesson being taught to the Americans today in Salvador. That when a people unite and begin to resist the tyranny, no force can stop them. No armies can stop them.

**Speaker 1** They have been passing some extremely repressive laws. They passed the Administration of Justice Act. And the bar association of this country found it necessary to forget the courts. They found it necessary to take industrial action to demonstrate the caucus against that legislation. They said then that this was a very sinister development because this act could be used for political victimization and for use against political enemies of the regime.

**Speaker 1** And we have seen this come to pass. We're seeing Guyanese people being denied the right to jury trial. An extremely important right, the foundation and cornerstone of justice. And today in Guyana, that right has gone by the board. And that was not enough! They founded the Administration of Justice Act, and when they tried to apply it to Brother [Accaka 00:08:42] the thing wasn't working too perfectly. Because in spite of the Genius of Aberdeen, he [inaudible 00:08:48] to go back home. And they offer serious [inaudible 00:08:54] in law.

**Speaker 1** So what did he have to do? He had to return to the continent in the middle of a cape and change the law. And they passed a new thing. A new monstrosity called the Criminal Law Bill. Well it is, because it has been passed by criminals.

**Speaker 1** Now these are hard forms of violence. The political murder. The unleashing of the military against workers. The abuse of the judiciary. The use of the court to [inaudible 00:09:31] is that a thing that we have come to pass in Guyana. It's a thing which our fathers and mothers who carry on their back in the struggle against colonialism in this country. Who fought for very serious rights, and won those rights. These rights their children and their grandchildren are living to see being taken away, day after day by this regime. And we have to put a stop to that, Brothers and Sisters.

**Speaker 1** Now I've been drawing your attention so far, to the most typical aspects of violence in this society. You want to [inaudible 00:10:16] the degeneration, when it drops its standards, have decided to change. So putting enough in a box those who would resign and go abroad. They're not putting down those who have been murdered by the police in a particular week. Day after day! In the rock and they call it good. Because he some nonsense about people attacking the police. Tell police if they arrest us around the land! And he [inaudible 00:10:28]

**Speaker 1** And the young people of this country who are deprived of work. And when you deprive people to work you deprive them to the right to life. You begin by depriving them of the right to life. They are traveling in to extreme situations. And then you hold them down on the street. That is the degeneration to which I'm drawing your attention.

**Speaker 1** And I am just drawing the attention of the Consumer's Association. And Mr. Cox, who would, the most recently, have spoken about this degeneration, must be commended for that stand.

**Speaker 1** And the other forms of violence, Sisters and Brothers, the hidden forms of violence practiced by the State, to which we must also draw attention. First to understand this violent State, we need only look at the history of the ruling party. How did it come into power? We know how it came into power. Beneath the [inaudible 00:11:56] how it came into power. It came into power by a well-orchestrated threat by the CIA and the British Intelligence Services that installed this regime on the backs of the Guyanese people. That is how it came into power. The CIA [inaudible 00:12:16] grown. It's on [inaudible 00:12:16] grown. It came in and it destroyed all the rational securities of our people. Fomented racial strife, homeo strife.

**Speaker 1** You remember the dark, nightmarish years of the '60's. That is how the PNC came into power. Let us not forget it. That was their first crime. Allow those [inaudible 00:12:28] that throw stones seem to me, pathological conclusion of PNC violence. It is a natural historical act of God that is described by the PNC. Because in Georgetown, that still uninvestigated monstrosity in Georgetown. A lot of these social features of the PNC came to be concentrated in some disgusting way.

**Speaker 1** [crosstalk 00:12:28] in Georgetown. The corruption. The American powers. You look! Every aspect of Georgetown is a concentrated destination of PNC behavior and activity. And we need to understand that they are becoming the power, and that's why the regime has found it necessary to maintain itself in power by the cost of exercise of violence.

**Speaker 1** We know Ministry of Elections, the reading of the list; this is all history. We lived through this. But it is important that we not lose the sense of revulsion of these activities. Let us not shut them out [inaudible 00:14:13]. That is not enough. We must recover in this country our sense of outrage at these kinds of activities. And it is when we recover in full that there's an outrage and revulsion that we have put an end to those kinds of practices.

**Speaker 1** I want to look at these kinds of, what I've called, the hidden forms of violence in this society. You know it is very easy; it is what the systems are free to do. It is what Ian Smith has been doing for years. To look at the liberation slaughter. To call the lying people who were putting out the word that Brother [Mugabi 00:14:57] used to drink blood, and all kinds of obscenities. Why? Why? Because this spirit exercise enormous violence against the African people. Until the day come when they decided that they have exhausted every possible means. They have exhausted every possible means. And nothing else was left but to commit their nations. And no revolutionary commits his nation proudly for bloodshed. But it was necessary in southern Africa. It was necessary in Zimbabwe.

**Speaker 1** So we have to be careful that when we hear all this talk of violence, and all this talk of treason. We have to be very careful. Analyze the situation very concretely, and understand who is practicing violence on whom.

**Speaker 1** The every day violence I am talking about has to do with the struggle for food. That is a form of violence. It is violence when a mother wakes up in the morning and cannot find food to feed her children. It is the most obscene form of violence. When that mother has to go and [inaudible 00:16:04] in Georgetown and throughout the country. Trying to find some ordinary items of food to feed the children and the family. This is an enormous kind of violence.

**Speaker 1** And then the regime, they speak about it without shame; this we have always known. But the obscenity of the Minister of Labor, of course to die on the sword, [inaudible 00:16:04] and the reason to belong, too. And that's because they're hoarding and giving it to the PNC, now that sharing institutes their foolishness. No, that is not the reason. The reason is because the workers in their isle are not packing the food past enough.

**Speaker 1** [inaudible 00:17:06] That's the way to go. All kinds of trusts were coming out with the workers' fight. And they turned around and said it was because of their men tried to have [inaudible 00:17:16] and I never see one skimming off of the top before. When we look at that situation, as we got food, imagine, back to what I told you the other night, a regime that would have the gall just before May Day, International Workers' Day, to put a big headline in The Chronicle, "[Mirak 00:17:42] has been banned the interest of the people."

**Speaker 1** Mirak has been banned in the interest of the people. Condemning with judgment because of your deficiency. Condemning our children to the fate of malnutrition. And you know, we have the most serious malnutrition. It is only Haiti in the Caribbean, only Haiti, that has a worse nutrition situation than Guyana.

**Speaker 1** When we look at the situation of the health services. Look at the situation of the public health hospitals. And realize that because of the corrupt support service, because of the demoralization of the doctors and the demoralization of the nurses, the shortage occurred at the general working conditions under which those people must operate. They realize that one of the nasty hits of this political have given rise to a lot of extremely exploitative practices in the private hospitals in this city. There are private hospitals in this city that make a habit of hiring nurses who haven't completed their final exams so they can pay them 110 guilders a month, and this is a poor [inaudible 00:19:02].

**Speaker 1** And the working people of the land, its drawing your attention to the way in which these revolutionary socialists allow the most exploitative kind of capitalist practice to call forward in this society. These are practices that are increasing. Upswing totalling, these are the big industries in the isle of the day. When you look at the situation of employment, it was mentioned in the beginning that it is over 30% of all working people who have no work. And what I said before, when you deprive people of work, you are depriving them and their families of the right to life.

**Speaker 1** Over 30% of all people have no work. And those that have work are told that "You are privileged. You are lucky. It is because the regime is so generous that you have work." And that is why they expect you to be so grateful that [inaudible 00:20:18], of any kind of opposition or disaffection on your part. They come to you and say, "Look. Maybe you have worked long enough. You give it to somebody else." And you only given it to.

**Speaker 1** The situation in the school. I want to touch on the school situation very briefly. Recently, some children of this city have pointed the way forward. And we in the Working People's Alliance, we hail the children who have marched forth!

**Speaker 1** It is important to realize that those children are protesting immediately the transfer of their headmistresses and headmasters. But that is not all that they are protesting. They are protesting against the shortness of textbooks. They are protesting against being dragged off into [inaudible 00:21:19]. They are protesting that why are we rushing the process for education in the school. This is the kind of things they are also protesting. And we believe in the Working People's Alliance that the children of this city mostly have been a pact in the clear, have responded in a way that we in this party are proud to call them Children of Guyana.

**Speaker 1** We know just where they come from. And that's why [inaudible 00:22:39] and decided to infiltrate into your home. All kinds of trash come in from them now every day. But the lock is right here. Because yesterday I noticed that [inaudible 00:22:39] I talked about, he was taken up for treason. And the next thing I know, some people get charged with treason. [inaudible 00:22:41] so we have to be very careful about that then. What he's trying to say about these school children; you know what he's saying about them? He's saying about them that they're the ones to watch at the colonial part, they are colonial little children. And they ought to be feel privilege. And that is why they don't want to see these good and [inaudible 00:22:42] going to the poor and working class schools. That is the whole analysis of the schoolchildren's movement in this city.

**Speaker 1** We have to say that [inaudible 00:22:56], that we're going to build. That the whole colonial crisis in this society, we still need an eradication. But we will not be diverted from the tasks of the low man, which is the struggle against the new colonial regime that is rocking our people into the most horrifying relation, the financial institution of imperial government. We are not [inaudible 00:23:01] against that, because they come and invoke. Those are the white people who gone from here so long. That's the work of the people, I tell you, who are the most prized workers. Go and ask a worker today. Go and ask him, under who he is still suffering oppression, and he will tell you. And he will not tell you they're Canadian.

**Speaker 1** Of these economic policies of the international monetary fund, the IMF is of course the most sad extension against the working people of this country. We warned, when the regime was entering into their secret deals with the IMF, we in this party warned that it could only aggravate the misery of the masses. The IMF have a long history of aggravating the misery of the masses throughout the world. And we have seen this come to pass. We have seen [inaudible 00:23:34]. We have seen collapse, the very collapsing social services come about. These are the normal bi-products of the IMF. They will settle for nothing less. When IMF gives you money, they give you money in exchange for your pride. That is the history of the IMF. And this regime have entered into this secret pact with INS.

**Speaker 1** One aspect of violence that I'll touch on briefly is the aspect to which Brother [Thorn 00:24:54] alluded the other night, which I believe to one of the most serious aspects of violence in this society. And that is the aspect of mental violence. What happens when a single party controls the only media? When they're stronger or of the media? When they are the only voice you can hear? It leaves the most vulnerable generation in the society as we are beginning to see that today. We have just learned that the two radio stations that will be go on, nothing new. We have seen the way in which you can influence the radio stations. [Shamrock 00:25:24] comes on and he said few nasty things about the local hero. The local hero around here is protected, and the next thing you know, Shamrock is off the radio. I am not a friend Shamrock. I am not a friend of Shamrock, but I am less of a friend of the local hero.

**Speaker 1** We must protest against this bombardment of our children, our homes, and the lies of the regime. The lies that are coming out of the radio day after day. The lies that are coming out in The Chronicle day after day. We must protest it, because accept we do. Accept we do. They will reduce [inaudible 00:26:31] when we hear one thing: orders to march. And march. It's what the development in Nazi Germany, it's what the development all totalitarian societies. And we know that one of the healthy things about a free society is the capacity of contending two voices to be heard. Let the people decide. Let them be met. Let them be a [inaudible 00:26:55] loose in a society. This we regard as a healthy situation. The situation today is as unhealthy as it can be.
